project	gutenberg’s	a	text-book	of	astronomy,	by	george	c.	comstock
this	ebook	is	for	the	use	of	anyone	anywhere	at	no	cost	and	with
almost	no	restrictions	whatsoever.		you	may	copy	it,	give	it	away	or
re-use	it	under	the	terms	of	the	project	gutenberg	license	included
with	this	ebook	or	online	at	www.gutenberg.org
title:	a	text-book	of	astronomy
author:	george	c.	comstock
release	date:	january	3,	2011	[ebook	#34834]
language:	english
***	start	of	this	project	gutenberg	ebook	a	text-book	of	astronomy	***
produced	by	chris	curnow,	iris	schimandle,	lindy	walsh	and
the	online	distributed	proofreading	team	at
http://www.pgdp.net
twentieth	century	text-books
edited	by
a.	f.	nightingale,	ph.d.,	ll.d.
formerly	superintendent	of	high	schools,	chicago
a	total	solar	eclipse.	after	burckhalter’s	photographs	of	the	eclipse	of	may	28,
1900.
a	total	solar	eclipse.
after	burckhalter’s	photographs	of	the	eclipse	of	may	28,	1900.
twentieth	century	text-books
a	text-book	of	astronomy
by
george	c.	comstock
director	of	the	washburn	observatory	and
professor	of	astronomy	in	the
university	of	wisconsin
new	york
d.	appleton	and	company
1903
copyright,	1901
by	d.	appleton	and	company
preface
thepresentworkisnotacompendiumofastronomyoranoutlinecourseofpopular
reading	in	that	science.	it	has	been	prepared	as	a	text-book,	and	the	author	has	purposely
omittedfromit	much	matterinterestingas	wellasimportanttoacompleteview	ofthe
science,	and	has	endeavored	to	concentrate	attention	upon	those	parts	ofthe	subjectthat
possessspecialeducationalvaluefromthispointofviewmatterwhichpermitsof
experimentaltreatmentwithsimpleapparatusisofpeculiarvalueandisgivena
prominence	in	the	text	beyond	its	just	due	in	a	well-balanced	exposition	of	the	elements	of
astronomywhiletopicssuchastheresultsofspectrumanalysiswhichdependupon
elaborateapparatusareintheexperimentalpartofthe	workaccorded	muchlessspace
than	their	intrinsic	importance	would	justify.
teacher	and	student	are	alike	urged	to	magnify	the	observational	side	of	the	subject	and	to
strive	to	obtain	in	their	work	the	maximum	degree	of	precision	of	which	their	apparatus	is
capable.	the	instruments	required	are	few	and	easily	obtained.	with	exception	of	a	watch
and	a	protractor,	all	ofthe	apparatus	needed	may	be	built	by	any	one	of	fair	mechanical
talent	who	willfollowtheillustrationsand	descriptions	ofthetextin	orderthat	proper
opportunity	for	observations	may	be	hadthe	study	should	be	pursued	duringthe	milder
portion	of	the	year,	between	april	and	november	in	northern	latitudes,	using	clear	weather
for	a	direct	study	of	the	sky	and	cloudy	days	for	book	work.
the	illustrations	contained	in	the	present	work	are	worthy	of	as	careful	study	as	is	the	text,
and	many	of	them	are	intended	as	an	aid	to	experimental	work	and	accurate	measurement,
e.	g.,	the	star	maps,	the	diagrams	of	the	planetary	orbits,	pictures	of	the	moon,	sun,	etc.	if
theschoolpossessesaprojectionlanternasetofastronomicalslidestobeusedin
connectionwithitmaybemadeofgreatadvantageifthepicturesarestudiedasan
auxiliary	to	nature.	mere	display	and	scenic	effect	are	of	little	value.
a	brief	bibliography	of	popular	literature	upon	astronomy	may	be	found	at	the	end	of	this
book,	and	it	will	be	well	if	at	least	a	part	of	these	works	can	be	placed	in	the	school	library
and	systematically	used	for	supplementary	reading.	an	added	interest	may	be	given	to	the
studyifoneormoreofthepopularperiodicalswhichdealwithastronomyaretaken
regularly	by	the	school	and	kept	within	easy	reach	of	the	students.	from	time	to	time	the
teachermaywellassigntopicstreatedintheseperiodicalstobereadbyindividual
students	and	presented	to	the	class	in	the	form	of	an	essay.
the	author	is	under	obligations	to	many	of	his	professional	friends	who	have	contributed
illustrative	matter	for	his	text,	and	his	thanks	are	in	an	especial	manner	due	to	the	editors
ofthe	astrophysicaljournal,	astronomyand	astrophysicsandpopular	astronomyfor
permission	to	reproduce	here	plates	which	have	appeared	in	those	periodicals,	and	to	dr.
charles	boynton,	who	has	kindly	read	and	criticised	the	proofs.
george	c.	comstock.
university	of	wisconsin,	february,	1901.
contents
chapterpage
i.—different	kinds	of	measurement1
the	measurement	of	angles	and	time.
ii.—the	stars	and	their	diurnal	motion10
finding	the	stars—their	apparent	motion—latitude—direction
of	the	meridian—sidereal	time—definitions.
iii.—fixed	and	wandering	stars29
apparent	motion	ofthe	sun,	moon,	and	planets—orbits	ofthe
planets—how	to	find	the	planets.
iv.—celestial	mechanics46
kepler’slaws—newton’slawsofmotion—thelawof
gravitation—orbital	motion—perturbations—masses	of	the	planets
—discovery	of	neptune—the	tides.
v.—the	earth	as	a	planet70
size—mass—precession—thewarmingoftheearth—the
atmosphere—twilight.
vi.—the	measurement	of	time86
solarandsiderealtime—longitude—thecalendar—
chronology.
vii.—eclipses101
theircauseandnature—eclipselimits—eclipsemaps—
recurrence	and	prediction	of	eclipses.
viii.—instruments	and	the	principles	involved	in	their	use121
theclock—radiantenergy—mirrorsandlenses—the
telescope—camera—spectroscope—principlesofspectrum
analysis.
ix.—the	moon150
numericaldata—phases—motion—librations—lunar
topography—physical	condition.
x.—the	sun178
numericaldata—chemicalnature—temperature—visibleand
invisibleparts—photosphere—spots—faculæ—chromosphere—
prominences—corona—thesun-spotperiod—thesun’srotation
—mechanical	theory	of	the	sun.
xi.—the	planets212
arrangementofthesolarsystem—bode’slaw—physical
condition	of	the	planets—jupiter—saturn—uranus	and	neptune—
venus—mercury—mars—the	asteroids.
xii.—comets	and	meteors251
motion,	size,	and	mass	of	comets—meteors—their	number	and
distribution—meteorshowers—relation	ofcometsand	meteors—
periodiccomets—cometfamiliesandgroups—comettails—
physical	nature	of	comets—collisions.
xiii.—the	fixed	stars291
number	of	the	stars—brightness—distance—proper	motion—
motion	in	line	of	sight—double	stars—variable	stars—new	stars.
xiv.—stars	and	nebul330
stellar	colors	and	spectra—classes	of	stars—clusters—nebulæ
—theirspectraandphysicalcondition—themilkyway—
construction	of	the	heavens—extent	of	the	stellar	system.
xv.—growth	and	decay358
logicalbasesandlimitations—developmentofthesun—the
nebularhypothesis—tidalfriction—roche’slimit—development
of	the	moon—development	of	stars	and	nebulæ—the	future.
appendix383
index387
list	of	lithographic	plates
facing	page
i.—northern	constellations124
ii.—equatorial	constellations190
iii.—map	of	mars246
iv.—the	pleiades344
protractorin	pocket	at	back	of	book
list	of	full-page	illustrations
facing	page
a	total	solar	eclipsefrontispiece
the	harvard	college	observatory,	cambridge,	mass24
isaac	newton46
galileo	galilei52
the	lick	observatory,	mount	hamilton,	cal60
the	yerkes	observatory,	williams	bay,	wis100
the	moon,	one	day	after	first	quarter150
william	herschel234
pierre	simon	laplace364
astronomy

chapter	i
different	kinds	of	measurement
1.	accurate	measurement.—accurate	measurementisthefoundationofexactscience,
and	at	the	very	beginning	of	his	study	in	astronomy	the	student	should	learn	something	of
theastronomer’skindof	measurement.	heshouldpractice	measuringthestars	withall
possible	care,	and	should	seek	to	attain	the	most	accurate	results	of	which	his	instruments
andapparatusarecapabletheordinaryaffairsoflifefurnishabundantillustrationof
some	of	these	measurements,	such	as	finding	the	length	of	a	board	in	inches	or	the	weight
of	a	load	of	coal	in	pounds	and	measurements	of	both	length	and	weight	are	of	importance
in	astronomy,	but	of	far	greater	astronomical	importance	than	these	are	the	measurement
ofanglesandthemeasurementoftimeakitchenclockoracheapwatchisusually
thought	of	as	a	machine	to	tell	the	“time	of	day,”	but	it	may	be	used	to	time	a	horse	or	a
bicycler	upon	a	race	course,	and	then	it	becomes	an	instrument	to	measure	the	amount	of
timerequiredfor	coveringthelength	ofthe	course.	astronomers	use	a	clockin	both	of
these	ways—to	tellthe	time	at	which	something	happens	oris	done,	and	to	measure	the
amount	of	time	required	for	something;	and	in	using	a	clock	for	either	purpose	the	student
shouldlearntotakethetimefromittothe	nearestsecond	or	betterifithasaseconds
handortoasmallfractionofa	minutebyestimatingthepositionofthe	minutehand
between	the	minute	marks	on	the	dial.	estimate	the	fraction	in	tenths	of	a	minute,	not	in
halves	or	quarters.
exercise	1.—if	several	watches	are	available,	let	one	person	tap	sharply	upon	a	desk	with
a	pencil	and	let	each	of	the	others	note	the	time	by	the	minute	hand	to	the	nearest	tenth	of
a	minute	and	record	the	observations	as	follows:
2h.	44.5mfirst	tap2h.	46.4m1.9m.
2h.	44.9msecond	tap2h.	46.7m1.8m.
2h.	46.6mthird	tap2h.	48.6m2.0m.
the	letters	h	and	m	are	used	as	abbreviations	for	hour	and	minute.	the	first	and	second
columns	of	the	table	are	the	record	made	by	one	student,	and	second	and	third	the	record
made	by	another.	after	all	the	observations	have	been	made	and	recorded	they	should	be
brought	together	and	compared	by	taking	the	differences	between	the	times	recorded	for
each	tap,	as	is	shown	in	the	last	column.	this	difference	shows	how	much	faster	one	watch
is	than	the	other,	and	the	agreement	or	disagreement	of	these	differences	shows	the	degree
ofaccuracyoftheobservationskeepupthispracticeuntiltenthsofaminutecanbe
estimated	with	fair	precision.
2.	angles	and	their	use.—an	angleisthe	amount	of	opening	or	difference	of	direction
between	two	lines	that	cross	each	other.	at	twelve	o’clock	the	hour	and	minute	hand	of	a
watch	point	in	the	same	direction	and	the	angle	between	them	is	zero.	at	one	o’clock	the
minutehandisagainat	xiibutthehourhandhas	movedtoionetwelfthpartofthe
circumferenceofthedialandtheanglebetweenthehandsisonetwelfthofa
circumference.	it	is	customary	to	imagine	the	circumference	of	a	dial	to	be	cut	up	into	360
equal	parts—i.	e.,	each	minute	space	of	an	ordinary	dialto	be	subdividedinto	six	equal
partseachofwhichiscalledadegreeandthemeasurementofanangleconsistsin
finding	how	many	of	these	degrees	are	included	in	the	opening	between	its	sides.	at	one
o’clock	the	angle	between	the	hands	of	a	watch	is	thirty	degrees,	which	is	usually	written
30°,	at	three	o’clock	it	is	90°,	at	six	o’clock	180°,	etc.
a	watch	may	be	used	to	measure	angles.	how?	but	a	more	convenient	instrument	is	the
protractorwhichisshowninfigappliedtotheangleabcandshowingthat
a	b	c	=	85°	as	nearly	as	the	protractor	scale	can	be	read.
the	student	should	have	and	use	a	protractor,	such	as	is	furnished	with	this	book,	for	the
numerous	exercises	which	are	to	follow.
fig.	1.—a	protractor.	fig.	1.—a	protractor.
exercise	2.—draw	neatly	a	triangle	with	sides	about	100	millimeters	long,	measure	each
of	its	angles	and	take	their	sum.	no	matter	what	may	be	the	shape	of	the	triangle,	this	sum
should	be	very	nearly	180°—exactlyifthe	work	were	perfect—but	perfectioncan
seldom	be	attained	and	one	ofthe	firstlessonsto	belearnedin	any	science	which	deals
with	measurement	is,	that	however	careful	we	may	be	in	our	work	some	minute	error	will
cling	to	it	and	our	results	can	be	only	approximately	correct.	this,	however,	should	not	be
taken	as	an	excuse	for	careless	work,	but	rather	as	a	stimulus	to	extra	effort	in	order	that
the	unavoidable	errors	may	be	made	as	small	as	possible.	in	the	present	case	the	measured
angles	may	be	improved	a	little	by	adding	(algebraically)	to	each	of	them	one	third	of	the
amount	by	which	their	sum	falls	short	of	180°,	as	in	the	following	example:
measured	anglescorrectioncorrected	angles°	
a73.5
b49.4
c57.1
sum180.0
defect+	0.3
thisprocessisinverycommonuseamongastronomersandiscalled“adjustingthe
observations.
fig.	2.—triangulation.	fig.	2.—triangulation.
3.	triangles.—theinstrumentsused	byastronomersforthe	measurementofanglesare
usually	provided	with	a	telescope,	which	may	be	pointed	at	different	objects,	and	with	a
scalelikethatoftheprotractortomeasuretheanglethroughwhichthetelescopeis
turned	in	passing	from	one	object	to	another.	in	this	way	it	is	possible	to	measure	the	angle
betweenlinesdrawnfromtheinstrumenttotwodistantobjectssuchastwochurch
steeples	or	the	sun	and	moon,	and	this	is	usually	called	the	angle	between	the	objects.	by
measuringanglesinthis	wayitispossibletodeterminethedistancetoaninaccessible
pointasshowninfigasurveyoratadesirestoknowthedistanceto	conthe
oppositeside	of	ariver	which	he	can	not	cross.	he	measures	with	atapeline	along	his
own	side	of	the	stream	the	distance	a	b	=	100	yards	and	then,	with	a	suitable	instrument,
measures	the	angle	at	a	between	the	points	c	and	b,	and	the	angle	at	b	between	c	and	a,
finding	b	a	c	=	73.4°,	a	b	c	=	49.3°.	to	determine	the	distance	a	c	he	draws	upon	paper
a	line	100	millimeters	long,	and	marks	the	ends	a	and	b;	with	a	protractor	he	constructs	at
a	the	angle	b	a	c	=	73.4°,	and	at	b	the	angle	a	b	c	=	49.3°,	and	marks	by	c	the	point	where
thetwolinesthus	drawn	meet.	withthe	millimeterscale	he	now	measuresthe	distance
ac90.2	millimeterswhichdeterminesthedistance	a	cacrosstherivertobe90.2
yards,	sincethetriangle	on	paper	has	been	made	similartothe	one	acrossthe	river,	and
millimetersontheonecorrespondtoyardsontheotherwhatisthepropositionof
geometry	upon	which	this	depends?	the	measured	distance	a	b	in	the	surveyor’s	problem
is	called	a	base	line.
exercise3.—withafootruleandaprotractormeasureabaselineandtheangles
necessary	to	determine	the	length	of	the	schoolroom.	after	the	length	has	been	thus	found,
measure	it	directly	with	the	foot	rule	and	compare	the	measured	length	with	the	one	found
fromtheanglesifany	partofthe	work	has	beencarelessly	donethestudent	need	not
expect	the	results	to	agree.
fig.	3.—finding	the	moon’s	distance	from	the	earth.
fig.	3.—finding	the	moon’s	distance	from	the	earth.
in	the	same	manner,	by	sighting	at	the	moon	from	widely	different	parts	of	the	earth,	as	in
fig.	3,	the	moon’s	distance	from	us	is	found	to	be	about	a	quarter	of	a	million	miles.	what
is	the	base	line	in	this	case?
4.	thehorizon—altitudes.—intheirobservationsastronomersandsailorsmake	much
use	of	the	plane	of	the	horizon,	and	practically	any	flat	and	level	surface,	such	as	that	of	a
smooth	pond,	may	be	regarded	as	a	part	of	this	plane	and	used	as	such.	a	very	common
observation	relatingtothe	plane	ofthe	horizonis	called	“takingthe	sun’s	altitude,”	and
consists	in	measuring	the	angle	between	the	sun’s	rays	and	the	plane	of	the	horizon	upon
which	they	fall.	this	angle	between	a	line	and	a	plane	appears	slightly	different	from	the
angle	between	two	lines,	but	is	really	the	same	thing,	since	it	means	the	angle	between	the
sun’s	rays	and	a	line	drawn	in	the	plane	of	the	horizon	toward	the	point	directly	under	the
sun.	compare	this	with	the	definition	given	in	the	geographies,	“the	latitude	of	a	point	on
the	earth’s	surface	is	its	angular	distance	north	or	south	of	the	equator,”	and	note	that	the
latitudeisthe	angle	betweenthe	plane	ofthe	equator	and	aline	drawnfromthe	earth’s
center	to	the	given	point	on	its	surface.
a	convenient	method	of	obtaining	a	part	of	the	plane	of	the	horizon	for	use	in	observation
is	as	follows:	place	a	slate	or	a	pane	of	glass	upon	a	table	in	the	sunshine.	slightly	moisten
its	whole	surface	and	then	pour	a	little	more	water	upon	it	near	the	center.	if	the	water	runs
toward	one	side,	thrust	the	edge	of	a	thin	wooden	wedge	under	this	side	and	block	it	up
until	the	water	shows	no	tendency	to	run	one	way	rather	than	another;	it	is	then	level	and	a
partoftheplaneofthehorizongetseveralwedgesreadybeforecommencingthe
experiment.	after	they	have	been	properly	placed,	drive	a	pin	or	tack	behind	each	one	so
that	it	may	not	slip.
5.	takingthesun’s	altitude.	exercise	4.—prepareapieceofboardcentimetersor
more,	square,	planed	smooth	on	one	face	and	one	edge.	drive	a	pin	perpendicularly	into
theface	ofthe	board,	nearthe	middle	ofthe	planed	edge.	setthe	board	on	edge	onthe
horizon	plane	and	turn	it	edgewise	toward	the	sun	so	that	a	shadow	of	the	pin	is	cast	on	the
plane.	stick	another	pinintothe	board,	nearits	upper	edge,	sothatits	shadow	shallfall
exactly	uponthe	shadow	ofthefirst	pin,	and	with	a	watch	or	clock	observethetime	at
which	the	two	shadows	coincide.	without	lifting	the	board	from	the	plane,	turn	it	around
so	that	the	opposite	edge	is	directed	toward	the	sun	and	set	a	third	pin	just	as	the	second
one	wasplacedandagaintakethetimeremovethepinsanddrawfinepencillines,
connecting	the	holes,	as	shown	in	fig.	4,	and	withthe	protractor	measurethe	anglethus
marked.	the	student	who	has	studied	elementary	geometry	should	be	able	to	demonstrate
that	at	the	mean	of	the	two	recorded	times	the	sun’s	altitude	was	equal	to	one	half	of	the
angle	measured	in	the	figure.
fig.	4.—taking	the	sun’s	altitude.	fig.	4.—taking	the	sun’s	altitude.
when	the	board	is	turned	edgewise	toward	the	sun	so	that	its	shadow	is	as	thin	as	possible,
rule	a	pencil	line	alongside	it	on	the	horizon	plane.	the	angle	which	this	line	makes	with	a
line	pointing	due	south	is	called	the	sun’s	azimuth.	when	the	sun	is	south,	its	azimuth	is
zero;	when	west,	it	is	90°;	when	east,	270°,	etc.
exercise	5.—letanumberofdifferentstudentstakethesun’saltitudeduringboththe
morningandafternoonsessionandnotethetimeofeachobservationtothenearest
minute.	verify	the	setting	of	the	plane	of	the	horizon	from	time	to	time,	to	make	sure	that
no	change	has	occurred	in	it.
6.	graphical	representations.—make	a	graph	(drawing)	of	allthe	observations,	similar
to	fig.	5,	and	find	by	bisecting	a	set	of	chords	g	to	g,	e	to	e,	d	to	d,	drawn	parallel	to	b	b,
the	time	at	which	the	sun’s	altitude	was	greatest.	in	fig.	5	we	see	from	the	intersection	of
m	m	with	b	b	that	this	time	was	11h.	50m.
the	method	of	graphs	which	is	here	introduced	is	of	great	importance	in	physical	science,
andthestudentshouldcarefullyobservein	figthattheline	b	bisascaleoftimes,
which	may	be	made	long	or	short,	provided	only	the	intervals	between	consecutive	hours
9	to	10,	10	to	11,	11	to	12,	etc.,	are	equal.	the	distance	of	each	little	circle	from	b	bis
takenproportionaltothesun’saltitudeandmaybeuponanydesiredscale—ega
millimeter	to	a	degree—provided	the	same	scale	is	used	for	all	observations.	each	circle	is
placed	accurately	over	that	part	of	the	base	line	which	corresponds	to	the	time	at	which	the
altitude	was	taken.	square	ruled	paper	is	very	convenient,	although	not	necessary,	for	such
diagrams.	it	is	especially	to	be	noted	that	from	the	few	observations	which	are	represented
in	the	figure	a	smooth	curve	has	been	drawn	through	the	circles	which	represent	the	sun’s
altitude,	andthis	curve	showsthe	altitude	ofthe	sun	at	every	moment	between	9	a.	m.
and	3	p.	m.	in	fig.	5	the	sun’s	altitude	at	noon	was	57°.	what	was	it	at	half	past	two?
fig.	5.—a	graph	of	the	sun’s	altitude.
fig.	5.—a	graph	of	the	sun’s	altitudediameterofadistantobject.—bysightingoveraprotractormeasuretheangle
betweenimaginarylinesdrawnfromittotheoppositesidesofawindowcarrythe
protractor	farther	away	from	the	window	and	repeat	the	experiment,	to	see	how	much	the
angle	changes.	the	angle	thus	measured	is	called	“the	angle	subtended”	by	the	window	at
theplace	wherethe	measurement	was	madeifthisplace	wassquarelyinfrontofthe
window	we	may	draw	upon	paper	an	angle	equal	to	the	measured	one	and	lay	off	from	the
vertexalongitssidesadistanceproportionaltothedistanceofthewindow—ega
millimeterfor	each	centimeter	ofreal	distanceif	a	crossline	be	now	drawn	connecting
the	points	thus	found,	its	length	will	be	proportional	to	the	width	of	the	window,	and	the
width	may	be	read	off	to	scale,	a	centimeter	for	every	millimeter	in	the	length	of	the	cross
line.
the	astronomer	who	measures	with	an	appropriate	instrument	the	angle	subtended	by	the
moon	may	in	an	entirely	similar	manner	find	the	moon’s	diameter	and	has,	in	fact,	found	it
to	be	2,163	miles.	can	the	same	method	be	used	to	find	the	diameter	of	the	sun?	a	planet?
the	earth?

chapter	ii
the	stars	and	their	diurnal	motion
8.	the	stars.—from	the	very	beginning	of	his	studyin	astronomy,	and	asfrequently	as
possiblethestudentshouldpractice	watchingthestarsbynighttobecomeacquainted
with	the	constellations	and	their	movements.	as	an	introduction	to	this	study	he	may	face
toward	the	north,	and	compare	the	stars	which	he	sees	in	that	part	of	the	sky	with	the	map
of	the	northern	heavens,	given	on	plate	i,	opposite	page	124.	turn	the	map	around,	upside
down	if	necessary,	until	the	stars	upon	it	match	the	brighter	ones	in	the	sky.	note	how	the
stars	are	grouped	in	such	conspicuous	constellations	as	the	big	dipper	(ursa	major),	the
little	dipper	(ursa	minor),	and	cassiopeia.	these	three	constellations	should	be	learned
so	that	they	can	be	recognized	at	any	time.
the	names	ofthestars.—facingthestar	mapisa	key	which	containsthe	names	ofthe
moreimportant	constellations	andthe	names	ofthe	brighter	starsintheir	constellations.
these	names	are	for	the	most	part	a	greek	letter	prefixed	to	the	genitive	case	of	the	latin
name	of	the	constellation.	(see	the	greek	alphabet	printed	at	the	end	of	the	book.)
9.	magnitudes	of	the	stars.—nearly	nineteen	centuries	ago	st.	paul	noted	that	“one	star
differethfromanotherstaringloryandno	moreapt	wordscanbefoundto	markthe
difference	of	brightness	whichthe	stars	present.	even	priorto	st.	paul’s	daythe	ancient
greek	astronomers	had	divided	the	stars	in	respect	of	brightness	into	six	groups,	which	the
modern	astronomers	still	use,	calling	each	group	a	magnitude.	thus	a	few	of	the	brightest
starsaresaidtobeofthefirstmagnitudethegreat	massoffaintoneswhicharejust
visible	to	the	unaided	eye	are	said	to	be	of	the	sixth	magnitude,	and	intermediate	degrees
ofbrilliancyarerepresentedbytheintermediate	magnitudessecondthirdfourthand
fifth.	the	student	must	not	be	misled	bythe	word	magnitudeit	has	noreferencetothe
size	of	the	stars,	but	only	to	their	brightness,	and	on	the	star	maps	of	this	book	the	larger
and	smaller	circles	by	which	the	stars	are	represented	indicate	only	the	brightness	of	the
stars	according	to	the	system	of	magnitudes.	following	the	indications	of	these	maps,	the
studentshouldinlearningthe	principalstarsand	constellationslearn	alsotorecognize
how	bright	is	a	star	of	the	second,	fourth,	or	other	magnitude.
10.	observingthestars.—findonthemapandintheskythestarsursæ	minoris,
α	ursæ	majorisβ	ursæ	majoris.	whatgeometricalfigure	willfitontothesestarsin
additiontoitsregularnameursæ	minorisisfrequentlycalledbythespecialname
polaris,	or	the	pole	star.	why	are	the	other	two	stars	called	“the	pointers”?	what	letter	of
the	alphabet	do	the	five	bright	stars	in	cassiopeia	suggest?
exercise	6.—standinsuchapositionthat	polarisisjusthidden	behindthecornerofa
building	or	some	other	vertical	line,	and	mark	upon	the	key	map	as	accurately	as	possible
the	position	of	this	line	with	respect	to	the	other	stars,	showing	which	stars	are	to	the	right
and	whicharetotheleftofitrecordthetime(datehourand	minuteatwhichthis
observation	was	made.	an	hour	or	two	later	repeat	the	observation	at	the	same	place,	draw
the	line	and	note	the	time,	and	you	will	find	that	the	line	last	drawn	upon	the	map	does	not
agree	withthefirst	one.	thestars	have	changedtheir	positionsand	withrespecttothe
verticallinethepointersarenowinadifferentdirectionfrompolaris.	measure	witha
protractorthe	angle	betweenthetwo	lines	drawn	inthe	map,	and	usethis	angle	andthe
recordedtimesoftheobservationtofindhow	manydegreesperhourthisdirectionis
changing.	it	should	be	about	15°	per	hour.	if	the	observation	were	repeated	12	hours	after
thefirstrecordedtime,	what	would	bethe	position	ofthe	verticalline	amongthestars?
what	would	it	be	24	hours	later?	a	week	later?	repeat	the	observation	on	the	next	clear
nightand	allowingforthe	number	of	wholerevolutions	made	bythestars	betweenthe
twodatesagaindeterminefromthetimeintervala	moreaccuratevalueoftherateat
which	the	stars	move.
themotionofthestarswhichthestudenthasheredetectediscalledtheir“diurnal”
motion.	what	is	the	significance	of	the	word	diurnal?
intheprecedingparagraphthereisintroducedamethodofgreatimportancein
astronomical	practice—i.	e.,	determining	something—in	this	case	the	rate	per	hour,	from
observationsseparated	by	alonginterval	oftimein	orderto	geta	more	accurate	value
than	could	be	found	from	a	short	interval.	why	is	it	more	accurate?	to	determine	the	rate
at	which	the	planet	mars	rotates	about	its	axis,	astronomers	use	observations	separated	by
anintervalofmorethanyearsduringwhichtheplanetmademorethan75,000
revolutionsuponitsaxisifweweretowriteoutinalgebraicformanequationfor
determining	the	length	of	one	revolution	of	mars	about	its	axis,	the	large	number,	75,000,
wouldappearintheequationasadivisorandinthefinalresultwouldgreatlyreduce
whatever	errors	existed	in	the	observations	employed.
repeat	exercisenightafternightandnote	whetherthestarscomebacktothesame
position	at	the	same	hour	and	minute	every	night.
fig.	6.	the	plumb-line	apparatus.
fig.	6.
fig.	7.	the	plumb-line	apparatus.
fig.	7.
the	plumb-line	apparatus.
11.	the	plumb-line	apparatus.—this	experiment,	and	many	others,	may	be	conveniently
and	accurately	made	with	no	other	apparatus	than	a	plumb	line,	and	a	device	for	sighting
pastitinfigsandthereisshownasimpleformofsuchapparatusconsisting
essentially	of	a	board	which	rests	in	a	horizontal	position	upon	the	points	of	three	screws
thatpassthroughitthisboardcarriesasmallboxtoonesideofwhichisnailedin
vertical	position	another	board	5	or	6	feet	long	to	carry	the	plumb	line.	this	consists	of	a
wire	or	fishline	with	any	heavy	weight—e.	g.,	a	brick	or	flatiron—tied	toitslower	end
andimmersedinavesselof	waterplacedinsidetheboxsoastocheckanyswinging
motionoftheweightinthecoveroftheboxisasmallholethroughwhichthewire
passes,	and	by	turning	the	screws	in	the	baseboard	the	apparatus	may	be	readily	leveled,
so	that	the	wire	shall	swing	freely	in	the	center	of	the	hole	without	touching	the	cover	of
the	box.	guy	wires,	shown	in	the	figure,	are	applied	so	as	to	stiffen	the	whole	apparatus.	a
boardwithascreweyeateachendmaybepivotedtotheuprightasinfigfor
measuring	altitudes;	or	to	the	box,	as	in	fig.	7,	for	observing	the	time	at	which	a	star	in	its
diurnal	motion	passesthroughthe	plane	determined	bythe	plumb	line	andthe	center	of
the	screw	eye	through	which	the	observer	looks.
the	whole	apparatus	may	be	constructed	by	any	person	of	ordinary	mechanical	skill	at	a
verysmallcostanditorsomethingequivalentshouldbeprovidedforeveryclass
beginningobservationalastronomytousetheapparatusfortheexperimentofit
shouldbeleveledandtheboard	withthescreweyesattachedasinfigshouldbe
turned	untilthe	observerlooking	through	the	screw	eye,	sees	polaris	exactly	behind	the
wire.	use	a	bicycle	lamp	to	illumine	the	wire	by	night.	the	apparatus	is	now	adjusted,	and
the	observer	has	only	to	wait	for	the	stars	which	he	desires	to	observe,	and	to	note	by	his
watch	the	time	at	which	they	pass	behind	the	wire.	it	will	be	seen	that	the	wire	takes	the
placeoftheverticaledgeofthebuildingandthattheboardwiththescreweyesis
introduced	solely	to	keep	the	observer	in	the	right	place	relative	to	the	wire.
12.	asiderealclock.—clocksaresometimessomadeandregulatedthattheyshow
always	the	same	hour	and	minute	when	the	stars	come	back	to	the	same	place,	and	such	a
timepieceis	called	a	sidereal	clock—i.	e.,	a	star-time	clock.	would	such	a	clock	gain	or
loseincomparison	withanordinary	watchcouldanordinary	watchbeturnedintoa
sidereal	watch	by	moving	the	regulator?
fig.	8.—photographing	the	circumpolar	stars.—barnard.
fig.	8.—photographing	the	circumpolar	stars.—barnard.
13.	photographing	the	stars.—exercise	7.—for	any	student	who	uses	a	camera.	upon
some	clear	and	moonless	night	point	the	camera,	properly	focused,	at	polaris,	and	expose
aplateforthreeorfourhoursupondevelopingtheplateyoushouldfindaseriesof
circular	trails	such	as	are	shown	in	fig.	8,	only	longer.	each	one	of	these	is	produced	by	a
star	moving	slowly	over	the	plate,	in	consequence	of	its	changing	position	in	the	sky.	the
center	indicated	by	these	curved	trails	is	called	the	pole	of	the	heavens.	it	is	that	part	of	the
sky	toward	which	is	pointed	the	axis	about	which	the	earth	rotates,	and	the	motion	of	the
stars	around	the	center	is	only	an	apparent	motion	due	to	the	rotation	of	the	earth	which
daily	carries	the	observer	and	his	camera	around	this	axis	while	the	stars	stand	still,	just	as
trees	and	fences	and	telegraph	poles	stand	still,	although	to	the	passenger	upon	a	railway
train	they	appear	to	be	in	rapid	motion.	so	far	as	simple	observations	are	concerned,	there
isno	methodby	whichthepupilcantellforhimselfthatthe	motionofthestarsisan
apparentratherthanarealoneandfollowingthecustomofastronomersweshall
habituallyspeakasifitwerearealmovementofthestarshowlongwastheplate
exposed	in	photographing	fig.	8?
14.	finding	the	stars.—on	platei,	opposite	pagethe	pole	ofthe	heavensis	atthe
center	ofthe	map,	near	polaris,	andthe	heavytrail	nearthe	center	of	figis	made	by
polaris.	seeifyoucanidentifyfromthe	mapany	ofthestars	whosetrailsshowinthe
photograph.	the	brighter	the	star	the	bolder	and	heavier	its	trail.
find	from	the	map	and	locate	in	the	sky	the	two	bright	stars	capella	and	vega,	which	are
onoppositesidesofpolarisandnearlyequidistantfromitdothesestarsshareinthe
motion	around	the	pole?	are	they	visible	on	every	clear	night,	and	all	night?
observe	other	bright	starsfartherfrom	polaristhan	are	vega	and	capella	and	notetheir
movement.	do	they	move	like	the	sun	and	moon?	do	they	rise	and	set?
in	what	part	of	the	sky	do	the	stars	move	most	rapidly,	near	the	pole	or	far	from	it?
howlong	doesittakethefastest	moving	starsto	makethe	circuit	ofthe	sky	and	come
back	to	the	same	place?	how	long	does	it	take	the	slow	stars?
15.	rising	and	setting	of	the	stars.—a	study	of	the	sky	along	the	lines	indicated	in	these
questions	will	show	that	there	is	a	considerable	part	of	it	surrounding	the	pole	whose	stars
are	visible	on	every	clear	night.	the	same	starissometimes	highinthe	skysometimes
low,	sometimes	to	the	east	of	the	pole	and	at	other	times	west	of	it,	but	is	always	above	the
horizonsuchstarsaresaidtobecircumpolaralittlefartherfromthepoleeachstar,
when	at	the	lowest	point	of	its	circular	path,	dips	for	a	time	below	the	horizon	and	is	lost
to	view,	and	the	farther	it	is	away	from	the	pole	the	longer	does	it	remain	invisible,	until,
inthe	case	of	stars	90°	away	from	the	pole,	we	findthem	hidden	below	the	horizon	for
twelve	hours	out	of	every	twenty-four	(see	fig.	9).	the	sun	is	such	a	star,	and	in	its	rising
andsettingacts	preciselyas	doesevery	otherstaratasimilar	distancefromthe	pole—
only,	as	we	shall	find	later,	each	star	keeps	always	at	(nearly)	the	same	distance	from	the
pole,	while	the	sun	in	the	course	of	a	year	changes	its	distance	from	the	pole	very	greatly,
and	thus	changes	the	amount	of	time	it	spends	above	and	below	the	horizon,	producing	in
this	way	the	long	days	of	summer	and	the	short	ones	of	winter.
fig.	9.—diurnal	motion	of	the	northern	constellations.
fig.	9.—diurnal	motion	of	the	northern	constellations.
how	much	time	do	stars	which	are	more	than	90°	from	the	pole	spend	above	the	horizon?
we	say	in	common	speech	that	the	sun	rises	in	the	east,	but	this	is	strictly	true	only	at	the
time	when	it	is	90°	distant	from	the	pole—i.	e.,	in	march	and	september.	at	other	seasons
it	rises	north	or	south	of	east	according	as	its	distance	from	the	pole	is	less	or	greater	than
90°,	and	the	same	is	true	for	the	stars.
16.	thegeographyofthesky.—findfromamapthelatitudeandlongitudeofyour
schoolhouse.	find	on	the	map	the	place	whose	latitude	is	39°	and	longitude	77°	west	of
themeridianofgreenwichisthereanyotherplaceintheworldwhichhasthesame
latitude	and	longitude	as	your	schoolhouse?
the	places	of	the	stars	in	the	sky	are	located	in	exactly	the	manner	which	is	illustrated	by
thesegeographicalquestionsonlydifferentnamesareusedinsteadoflatitudethe
astronomersays	declinationinplaceoflongitudehesaysrightascensioninplaceof
meridian	he	says	hour	circle,	but	he	means	bythese	new	namesthe	sameideasthatthe
geographer	expresses	by	the	old	ones.
imagine	the	earth	swollen	up	untilitfillsthe	whole	skythe	earth’s	equator	would	meet
the	sky	along	a	line	(a	great	circle)	everywhere	90°	distant	from	the	pole,	and	this	line	is
calledthecelestialequatortraceitspositionalongthemiddleofthemapopposite
page	190	and	notice	near	whatstarsitruns.	every	meridian	oftheswollen	earth	would
touchtheskyalonganhourcircle—ieagreatcirclepassingthroughthepoleand
therefore	perpendiculartothe	equator.	notethatinthe	map	one	ofthese	hour	circlesis
markeditplaysthesame	partin	measuringrightascensionsasdoesthe	meridian	of
greenwichin	measuringlongitudesitisthebeginningfrom	whichtheyarereckoned.
note	also,	at	the	extreme	left	end	of	the	map,	the	four	bright	stars	in	the	form	of	a	square,
onesideofwhichisparallelandclosetothehourcirclewhichismarkedthisis
familiarly	called	the	great	square	in	pegasus,	and	may	be	found	high	up	in	the	southern
skywheneverthebigdipperliesbelowthepole.	whycanitnotbeseenwhenursa
major	is	above	the	pole?
astronomers	use	the	right	ascensions	of	the	stars	not	only	to	tell	in	what	part	of	the	sky	the
star	is	placed,	but	also	in	time	reckonings,	to	regulate	their	sidereal	clocks,	and	with	regard
to	this	use	they	find	it	convenient	to	express	right	ascension	not	in	degrees	but	in	hours,	24
of	which	fill	upthe	circuit	ofthe	sky	and	each	of	whichis	equalto	15°	of	arc,	24	×	15
=	360.	the	right	ascension	of	capella	is	5h.	9m.	=	77.2°,	but	the	student	should	accustom
himselfto	usingitin	hoursand	minutesas	given	and	nottochangeitinto	degrees.	he
should	also	note	that	some	stars	lie	on	the	side	of	the	celestial	equator	toward	polaris,	and
othersare	onthe	oppositesidesothattheastronomer	hasto	distinguish	between	north
declinationsandsouthdeclinationsjustasthegeographerdistinguishesbetweennorth
latitudes	and	south	latitudes.	this	is	done	by	the	use	of	the	+	and	-	signs,	a	+	denoting	that
the	star	lies	north	of	the	celestial	equator,	i.	e.,	toward	polaris.
fig.	10.—from	a	photograph	of	the	pleiades.
fig.	10.—from	a	photograph	of	the	pleiades.
findonplateiioppositepagethepleiades(plēadēsra3h42m.,
dec.	=	+23.8°.	why	do	they	not	show	on	plate	i,	opposite	page	124?	in	what	direction	are
they	from	polaris?	this	is	one	of	the	finest	star	clusters	in	the	sky,	but	it	needs	a	telescope
to	bring	out	its	richness.	see	how	many	stars	you	can	count	in	it	with	the	naked	eye,	and
afterwardexamineitwithanoperaglasscomparewhatyouseewithfigfind
antares,	r.	a.	=	16h.	23m.	dec.	=	-26.2°.	how	far	is	itin	degrees,	from	the	pole?	is	it
visible	in	your	sky?	if	so,	what	is	its	color?
findtheraanddecofursæ	majorisofursæ	majorisofpolarisfindthe
northerncrowncoronaborealisra15h30mdecthebeehive,
præsepe,	r.	a.	=	8h.	33m.,	dec.	=	+20.4°.
these	should	be	looked	up,	not	only	on	the	map,	but	also	in	the	sky.
17.	referencelinesandcircles.—asthestarsmoveacrosstheskyintheirdiurnal
motion,	they	carry	the	framework	of	hour	circles	and	equator	with	them,	so	that	the	right
ascension	and	declination	of	each	star	remain	unchanged	by	this	motion,	just	as	longitudes
and	latitudes	remain	unchanged	by	the	earth’s	rotation.	they	are	the	same	when	a	star	is
rising	and	when	it	is	setting;	when	it	is	above	the	pole	and	when	it	is	below	it.	during	each
day	the	hour	circle	of	every	star	in	the	heavens	passes	overhead,	and	at	the	moment	when
any	particular	hour	circle	is	exactly	overhead	all	the	stars	which	lie	upon	it	are	said	to	be
“on	the	meridian”—i.	e.,	at	that	particular	moment	they	stand	directly	over	the	observer’s
geographical	meridian	and	upon	the	corresponding	celestial	meridian.
an	eye	placed	at	the	center	of	the	earth	and	capable	of	looking	through	its	solid	substance
would	see	your	geographical	meridian	against	the	background	of	the	sky	exactly	covering
your	celestial	meridian	and	passing	from	one	pole	through	your	zenith	to	the	other	pole.	in
figtheinnercirclerepresentstheterrestrial	meridianofacertainplace,	oasseen
from	the	center	of	the	earth,	c,	and	the	outer	circle	represents	the	celestial	meridian	of	o
as	seen	from	c,	only	we	must	imagine,	what	can	not	be	shown	on	the	figure,	that	the	outer
circle	is	so	large	that	the	inner	one	shrinks	to	a	mere	point	in	comparison	with	it.	if	c	p
representsthe	directionin	whichtheearth’saxis	passesthroughthecenterthen	c	eat
rightanglestoitmustbethedirectionoftheequatorwhichwesupposetobeturned
edgewisetowardusandif	c	oisthedirectionofsome	particularpointontheearth’s
surfacethenzdirectlyoverheadiscalledthezenithofthatpointuponthecelestial
sphere.	the	line	c	h	represents	a	direction	parallel	to	the	horizon	plane	at	o,	and	h	c	p	is
the	angle	which	the	axis	of	the	earth	makes	with	this	horizon	plane.	the	arc	o	e	measures
the	latitude	of	o,	and	the	arc	z	e	measures	the	declination	of	z,	and	since	by	elementary
geometry	each	of	these	arcs	contains	the	same	number	of	degrees	as	the	angle	e	c	z,	we
have	the
fig.	11.—reference	lines	and	circles.	fig.	11.—reference	lines	and	circles.
theorem.—the	latitude	of	any	place	is	equal	to	the	declination	of	its	zenith.
corollary.—anystar	whosedeclinationisequaltoyourlatitude	willonceineachday
pass	through	your	zenith.
18.	latitude.—from	the	construction	of	the	figure
∠	e	c	z	+	∠	z	c	p90°
∠	h	c	p	+	∠	z	c	p90°
from	which	we	find	by	subtraction	and	transposition
∠	e	c	z	=	∠	h	c	p
and	this	gives	the	further
theorem.—the	latitude	of	any	place	is	equal	to	the	elevation	of	the	pole	above	its	horizon
plane.
an	observer	who	travels	north	or	south	over	the	earth	changes	his	latitude,	and	therefore
changes	the	angle	between	his	horizon	plane	and	the	axis	of	the	earth.	what	effect	will	this
have	upon	the	position	of	stars	in	his	sky?	if	you	were	to	go	to	the	earth’s	equator,	in	what
partofthesky	wouldyoulookforpolaris?	canpolarisbeseenfrom	australiafrom
south	americaif	you	wereto	gofrom	minnesotato	texasin	whatrespect	wouldthe
appearance	of	stars	in	the	northern	sky	be	changed?	how	would	the	appearance	of	stars	in
the	southern	sky	be	changed?
fig.	12.—diurnal	path	of	polaris.	fig.	12.—diurnal	path	of	polaris.
exercise	8.—determine	your	latitude	by	taking	the	altitude	of	polaris	when	it	is	at	some
one	of	the	four	points	of	its	diurnal	path,	shown	in	fig.	12.	when	it	is	at	1	it	is	said	to	be	at
upperculminationandthestarζ	ursæ	majorisinthe	handle	ofthe	big	dipper	will	be
directlybelowit.	whenatitisat	westernelongationandthestar	castorisnearthe
meridian.	when	it	is	at	3	it	is	at	lower	culmination,	and	the	star	spica	is	on	the	meridian.
when	it	is	at	4	it	is	at	eastern	elongation,	and	altair	is	near	the	meridian.	all	of	these	stars
are	conspicuous	ones,	which	the	student	should	find	upon	the	map	and	learn	to	recognize
in	the	sky.	the	altitude	observed	at	either	2	or	4	may	be	considered	equal	to	the	latitude	of
the	place,	but	the	altitude	observed	when	polaris	is	at	the	positions	marked	1	and	3	must
be	corrected	for	the	star’s	distance	from	the	pole,	which	may	be	assumed	equal	to	1.3°.
the	plumb-line	apparatus	described	at	page	12	is	shown	in	fig.	6	slightly	modified,	so	as
to	adapt	it	to	measuring	the	altitudes	of	stars.	note	that	the	board	with	the	screw	eye	at	one
end	has	been	transferred	from	the	box	to	the	vertical	standard,	and	has	a	screw	eye	at	each
end.	whenthe	apparatus	has	been	properlyleveledsothatthe	plumbline	hangs	atthe
middleoftheholeintheboxcovertheboardistobepointedatthestarbysighting
through	the	centers	of	the	two	screw	eyes,	and	a	pencil	line	is	to	be	ruled	along	its	edge
upon	the	face	of	the	vertical	standard.	after	this	has	been	done	turn	the	apparatus	halfway
around	sothat	what	wasthe	northside	now	pointssouthlevelitagain	andrevolvethe
board	aboutthe	screw	which	holdsittothe	vertical	standard,	untilthe	screw	eyes	again
point	to	the	star.	rule	another	line	along	the	same	edge	of	the	board	as	before	and	with	a
protractor	measure	the	angle	between	these	lines.	use	a	bicycle	lamp	if	you	need	artificial
light	for	your	work.	the	student	who	has	studied	plane	geometry	should	be	able	to	prove
that	one	half	of	the	angle	between	these	lines	is	equal	to	the	altitude	of	the	star.
afteryouhavedeterminedyourlatitudefrompolariscomparetheresultwithyour
position	as	shown	upon	the	best	map	available.	with	a	little	practice	and	considerable	care
the	latitude	may	be	thus	determined	within	one	tenth	of	a	degree,	which	is	equivalent	to
about	7	miles.	if	you	go	10	miles	north	or	south	from	your	first	station	you	should	find	the
pole	higher	up	or	lower	down	in	the	sky	by	an	amount	which	can	be	measured	with	your
apparatus.
19.	the	meridian	line.—to	establish	a	true	north	and	south	line	upon	the	ground,	use	the
apparatus	as	described	at	page	13,	and	when	polaris	is	at	upper	or	lower	culmination	drive
into	the	ground	two	stakes	in	line	with	the	star	and	the	plumb	line.	such	a	meridian	line	is
ofgreatconvenienceinobservingthestarsandshouldbelaidoutandpermanently
markedinsome	convenient	openspacefrom	whichifpossibleallparts	ofthesky	are
visiblejuneand	novemberareconvenient	monthsforthisexercisesincepolaristhen
comes	to	culmination	early	in	the	evening.
20.	time.—what	is	the	time	at	which	school	begins	in	the	morning?	what	do	you	mean
by	“the	time“?
thesiderealtimeatany	momentistherightascension	ofthe	hourcircle	whichatthat
momentcoincideswiththemeridianwhenthehourcirclepassingthroughsirius
coincides	with	the	meridian,	the	sidereal	time	is	6h.	40m.,	since	that	is	the	right	ascension
of	siriusandin	astronomicallanguage	siriusis“onthe	meridianat6h40msidereal
time.	as	may	be	seen	from	the	map,	this	6h.	40m.	is	the	right	ascension	of	sirius,	and	if	a
clock	be	settoindicate	6h.	40m.	when	sirius	crossesthe	meridianit	will	show	sidereal
timeifthe	clockis	properly	regulated,	every	other	starinthe	heavens	will	come	tothe
meridian	at	the	moment	when	the	time	shown	by	the	clock	is	equal	to	the	right	ascension
ofthe	star.	a	clock	properlyregulatedforthis	purpose	will	gain	aboutfour	minutes	per
dayincomparisonwithordinaryclocksandwhensoregulateditiscalledasidereal
clock.	the	student	should	be	provided	with	such	a	clock	for	his	future	work,	but	one	such
clock	will	serve	for	several	persons,	and	a	nutmeg	clock	or	a	watch	of	the	cheapest	kind	is
quite	sufficient.
the	harvard	college	observatory,	cambridge,	mass.
the	harvard	college	observatory,	cambridge,	mass.
exercise	9.—set	such	a	clock	to	sidereal	time	by	means	of	the	transit	of	a	star	over	your
meridian.	for	this	experiment	it	is	presupposed	that	a	meridian	line	has	been	marked	out
on	the	ground	as	in	§	19,	and	the	simplest	mode	of	performing	the	experiment	required	is
for	the	observer,	having	chosen	a	suitable	star	in	the	southern	part	of	the	sky,	to	place	his
eyeaccuratelyoverthenorthernendofthe	meridianlineandtoestimateasnearlyas
possible	the	beginning	and	end	of	the	period	during	which	the	star	appears	to	stand	exactly
above	the	southern	end	of	the	line.	the	middle	of	this	period	may	be	taken	as	the	time	at
whichthe	star	crossedthe	meridian	and	atthis	momentthe	siderealtimeis	equaltothe
right	ascension	ofthe	star.	the	difference	between	this	right	ascension	and	the	observed
middle	instant	is	the	error	of	the	clock	or	the	amount	by	which	its	hands	must	be	set	back
or	forward	in	order	to	indicate	true	sidereal	time.
amoreaccuratemodeofperformingtheexperimentconsistsinusingtheplumb-line
apparatus	carefully	adjusted,	as	in	fig.	7,	so	that	the	line	joining	the	wire	to	the	center	of
the	screw	eye	shall	be	parallel	to	the	meridian	line.	observe	the	time	by	the	clock	at	which
the	star	disappears	behind	the	wire	as	seen	through	the	center	of	the	screw	eye.	if	the	star
is	too	high	up	in	the	sky	for	convenient	observation,	place	a	mirror,	face	up,	just	north	of
the	screw	eye	and	observe	star,	wire	and	screw	eye	by	reflection	in	it.
the	numericalright	ascension	ofthe	observed	staris	neededforthis	experimentandit
may	be	measured	from	the	star	map,	but	it	will	usually	be	best	to	observe	one	of	the	stars
of	the	table	at	the	end	of	the	book,	and	to	obtain	its	right	ascension	as	follows:	the	table
gives	the	right	ascension	and	declination	of	each	star	as	they	were	at	the	beginning	of	the
yearbutonaccountoftheprecession(see	chapter	vthesenumbersallchange
slowly	with	the	lapse	oftime,	and	on	the	average	the	right	ascension	of	each	star	ofthe
table	must	beincreased	by	onetwentieth	of	a	minutefor	each	year	after	1900—i.	ein
1910	the	right	ascension	of	the	first	star	of	the	table	will	be	0h.	38.6m.	+	(10/20)m.	=	0h.
39.1mthedeclinationsalsochangeslightlybutastheyareonlyintendedtohelpin
finding	the	star	on	the	star	maps,	their	change	may	be	ignored.
having	set	the	clock	approximately	to	sidereal	time,	observe	one	or	two	more	stars	in	the
same	way	as	above.	the	difference	between	the	observed	time	and	the	right	ascension,	if
any	is	found,	is	the	“correction”	of	the	clock.	this	correction	ought	not	to	exceed	a	minute
if	due	care	has	been	taken	in	the	several	operations	prescribed.	the	relation	of	the	clock	to
therightascensionofthestarsisexpressedinthefollowingequationwithwhichthe
student	should	become	thoroughly	familiar:
a	=	t	±	u
tstandsforthetime	bythe	clock	at	whichthestar	crossedthe	meridian.	aistheright
ascension	of	the	star,	and	u	is	the	correction	of	the	clock.	use	the	+	sign	in	the	equation
whenever	the	clock	is	too	slow,	and	the	-	sign	when	it	is	too	fast.	u	may	be	found	from
this	equation	when	a	and	t	are	given,	or	a	may	be	found	when	t	and	u	are	given.	it	is	in
this	way	that	astronomers	measure	the	right	ascensions	of	the	stars	and	planets.
determine	u	from	each	star	you	have	observed,	and	note	how	the	several	results	agree	one
with	another.
21.	definitions.—to	define	a	thing	or	an	idea	is	to	give	a	description	sufficient	to	identify
it	and	distinguish	it	from	every	other	possible	thing	or	idea.	if	a	definition	does	not	come
up	to	this	standard	it	is	insufficient.	anything	beyond	this	requirement	is	certainly	useless
and	probably	mischievous.
letthestudentdefinethefollowinggeographicaltermsandlethimalsocriticisethe
definitionsofferedbyhisfellow-studentsequatorpolesmeridianlatitudelongitude,
north,	south,	east,	west.
comparethefollowingastronomicaldefinitions	withyourgeographicaldefinitionsand
criticise	them	in	the	same	way.	if	you	are	not	able	to	improve	upon	them,	commit	them	to
memory:
the	poles	of	the	heavens	are	those	points	in	the	sky	toward	which	the	earth’s	axis	points.
how	many	are	there?	the	one	near	polaris	is	called	the	north	pole.
the	celestial	equator	is	a	great	circle	of	the	sky	distant	90°	from	the	poles.
the	zenith	is	that	point	of	the	sky,	overhead,	toward	which	a	plumb	line	points.	why	is	the
word	overhead	placed	in	the	definition?	is	there	more	than	one	zenith?
the	horizon	is	a	great	circle	of	the	sky	90°	distant	from	the	zenith.
an	hour	circleis	any	great	circle	of	the	sky	which	passes	through	the	poles.	every	star
has	its	own	hour	circle.
the	meridian	is	that	hour	circle	which	passes	through	the	zenith.
averticalcircleisanygreatcirclethatpassesthroughthezenithisthemeridiana
vertical	circle?
the	declination	of	a	star	is	its	angular	distance	north	or	south	of	the	celestial	equator.
the	right	ascension	of	a	staristhe	angleincluded	betweenits	hour	circle	andthe	hour
circle	of	a	certain	point	on	the	equator	which	is	called	the	vernal	equinox.	from	spherical
geometry	we	learn	that	this	angle	is	to	be	measured	either	at	the	pole	where	the	two	hour
circles	intersect,	as	is	done	in	the	star	map	opposite	page	124,	or	along	the	equator,	as	is
done	in	the	map	opposite	page	190.	right	ascension	is	always	measured	from	the	vernal
equinox	in	the	direction	opposite	to	that	in	which	the	stars	appear	to	travel	in	their	diurnal
motion—i.	e.,	from	west	toward	east.
the	altitude	of	a	star	is	its	angular	distance	above	the	horizon.
the	azimuthofastaristheanglebetweenthe	meridianandtheverticalcirclepassing
through	the	star.	a	star	due	south	has	an	azimuth	of	0°.	due	west,	90°.	due	north,	180°.
due	east,	270°.
what	is	the	azimuth	of	polaris	in	degrees?
whatisthe	azimuth	ofthesun	atsunrise?	atsunset?	at	noon?	arethese	azimuthsthe
same	on	different	days?
thehourangleofastaristheanglebetweenitshourcircleandthemeridianitis
measuredfromthe	meridianinthedirectionin	whichthestarsappeartotravelintheir
diurnal	motion—i.	e.,	from	east	toward	west.
what	is	the	hour	angle	of	the	sun	at	noon?	what	is	the	hour	angle	of	polaris	when	it	is	at
the	lowest	point	in	its	daily	motion?
22.	exercises.—the	student	must	not	be	satisfied	with	merely	learning	these	definitions.
he	must	learn	to	see	these	points	and	lines	in	his	mind	as	if	they	were	visibly	painted	upon
thesky.	tothis	endit	will	help	himto	notethatthe	polesthe	zeniththe	meridianthe
horizonandtheequatorseemtostandstillintheskyalwaysinthesameplacewith
respect	to	the	observer,	while	the	hour	circles	and	the	vernal	equinox	move	with	the	stars
andkeepthesameplaceamongthemdoestheapparentmotionofastarchangeits
declination	or	right	ascension?	what	is	the	hour	angle	of	the	sun	when	it	has	the	greatest
altitude?	will	your	answer	to	the	preceding	question	be	true	for	a	star?	what	is	the	altitude
ofthesunaftersunsetinwhatdirectionisthenorthpolefromthezenithfromthe
vernalequinoxwherearethepointsinwhichthemeridianandequatorrespectively
intersect	the	horizon?

chapter	iii
fixed	and	wandering	starsstarmaps.—selectfromthemapsomeconspicuousconstellationthatwillbe
conveniently	placed	for	observation	in	the	evening,	and	make	on	a	large	scale	a	copy	of	all
thestarsoftheconstellationthatareshown	uponthe	map.	atnightcomparethiscopy
with	the	sky,	and	mark	in	upon	your	paper	all	the	stars	of	the	constellation	which	are	not
already	there.	both	the	original	drawing	and	the	additions	made	to	it	by	night	should	be
carefully	done,	and	for	the	latter	purpose	what	is	called	the	method	of	allineations	may	be
used	with	advantage—i.	e.,	the	new	star	is	in	line	with	two	already	on	the	drawing	and	is
midway	between	them,	or	it	makes	an	equilateral	triangle	with	two	others,	or	a	square	with
three	others,	etc.
aseriesof	mapsofthe	moreprominentconstellationssuchas	ursa	major,	cassiopea,
pegasus,	taurus,	orion,	gemini,	canis	major,	leo,	corvus,	bootes,	virgo,	hercules,	lyra,
aquilascorpiusshouldbeconstructedinthismanneruponauniformscaleand
preserved	as	a	part	of	the	student’s	work.	let	the	magnitude	of	the	stars	be	represented	on
themapsasaccuratelyasmaybeandnotethepeculiarityofcolorwhichsomestars
present.	for	the	most	part	their	color	is	a	very	pale	yellow,	but	occasionally	one	may	be
found	of	a	decidedly	ruddy	hue—e.	g.,	aldebaran	or	antares.	such	a	star	map,	not	quite
complete,	is	shown	in	fig.	13.
sotooasharpeyemaydetectthatsomestarsdonotremainalwaysofthesame
magnitudebutchangetheirbrightnessfromnighttonightandthisnotonaccountof
cloud	or	mist	in	the	atmosphere,	but	from	something	in	the	star	itself.	algol	is	one	of	the
most	conspicuous	of	these	variable	stars,	as	they	are	called.
fig.	13.—star	map	of	the	region	about	orion.
fig.	13.—star	map	of	the	region	about	orionthemoon’smotionamongthestars.—wheneverthemoonisvisiblenoteits
position	amongthestars	by	allineationsand	plotitonthe	key	map	opposite	page	190.
keep	a	record	of	the	day	and	hour	corresponding	to	each	such	observation.	you	will	find,
ifthe	workis	correctly	donethatthe	positions	ofthe	moon	allfall	nearthe	curvedline
shown	on	the	map.	this	line	is	called	the	ecliptic.
after	several	such	observations	have	been	made	and	plottedfind	by	measurementfrom
the	map	how	many	degrees	per	day	the	moon	moves.	how	long	would	it	require	to	make
the	circuit	of	the	heavens	and	come	back	to	the	starting	point?
on	each	night	when	you	observe	the	moon,	make	on	a	separate	piece	of	paper	a	drawing
of	it	about	10	centimeters	in	diameter	and	show	in	the	drawing	every	feature	of	the	moon’s
face	which	you	can	see—e.	g.,	the	shape	of	the	illuminated	surface	(phase);	the	direction
amongthestarsofthelinejoiningthehornsanyspotswhichyoucanseeuponthe
moon’s	face,	etc.	an	opera	glass	will	prove	of	great	assistance	in	this	work.
useyourdrawingsandthepositionsofthe	moonplotteduponthe	maptoanswerthe
followingquestionsdoesthedirectionofthelinejoiningthehornshaveanyspecial
relationtotheecliptic?	doestheamountofilluminatedsurfaceofthe	moonhaveany
relation	to	the	moon’s	angular	distance	from	the	sun?	does	it	have	any	relation	to	the	time
at	which	the	moon	sets?	do	the	spots	on	the	moon	when	visible	remain	always	in	the	same
place?	do	they	come	and	go?	do	they	change	their	position	with	relation	to	each	other?
can	you	determine	from	these	spots	that	the	moon	rotates	about	an	axis,	as	the	earth	does?
in	what	direction	does	its	axis	point?	how	long	does	it	take	to	make	one	revolution	about
the	axis?	is	there	any	day	and	night	upon	the	moon?
each	ofthese	questionscan	becorrectlyansweredfromthestudent’sown	observations
without	recourse	to	any	book.
25.	the	sun	and	its	motion.—examine	the	face	of	the	sun	through	a	smoked	glass	to	see
if	there	is	anything	there	that	you	can	sketch.
by	day	as	well	as	by	night	the	sky	is	studded	with	stars,	only	they	can	not	be	seen	by	day
on	account	of	the	overwhelming	glare	of	sunlight,	but	the	position	of	the	sun	amongthe
stars	may	be	found	quite	as	accurately	as	was	that	of	the	moon,	by	observing	from	day	to
day	its	right	ascension	and	declination,	and	this	should	be	practiced	at	noon	on	clear	days
by	different	members	of	the	class.
exercise	10.—the	right	ascension	of	the	sun	may	be	found	by	observing	with	the	sidereal
clock	the	time	of	its	transit	over	the	meridian.	use	the	equation	in	§	20,	and	substitute	in
placeofuthevalueoftheclockcorrectionfoundfromobservationsofstarsona
preceding	or	following	night.	if	the	clock	gains	or	loses	with	respect	to	sidereal	time,	take
this	into	account	in	the	value	of	u.
exercise11.—todeterminethesun’sdeclinationmeasureitsaltitudeatthetimeit
crossesthe	meridian.	useeitherthe	methodof	exerciseorthatused	withpolarisin
exercise	8.	the	student	should	be	able	to	show	from	fig.	11	that	the	declination	is	equal	to
the	sum	of	the	altitude	and	the	latitude	of	the	place	diminished	by	90°,	or	in	an	equation
declination	=	altitude	+	latitude	-	90°.
if	the	declination	as	found	from	this	equation	is	a	negative	number	it	indicates	that	the	sun
is	on	the	south	side	of	the	equator.
the	right	ascension	and	declination	of	the	sun	as	observed	on	each	day	should	be	plotted
onthe	mapandthedatewrittenoppositeitiftheworkhasbeencorrectlydonethe
plotted	points	should	fall	upon	the	curved	line	(ecliptic)	which	runs	lengthwise	of	the	map.
this	line,	in	fact,	represents	the	sun’s	path	among	the	stars.
note	that	the	hours	of	right	ascension	increase	from	0	up	to	24,	while	the	numbers	on	the
clock	dial	go	only	from	0	to	12,	and	then	repeat	0	to	12	again	during	the	same	day.	when
the	sidereal	time	is	13	hours,	14	hours,	etcthe	clock	will	indicate	1	hour,	2	hours,	etc.,
and	12	hours	must	then	be	added	to	the	time	shown	on	the	dial.
if	observations	of	the	sun’s	right	ascension	and	declination	are	made	in	the	latter	part	of
either	march	or	september	the	student	will	find	that	the	sun	crosses	the	equator	atthese
times,	and	he	should	determine	from	his	observations,	as	accurately	as	possible,	the	date
and	hour	of	this	crossing	and	the	point	on	the	equator	at	which	the	sun	crosses	it.	these
points	are	called	the	equinoxes,	vernal	equinox	and	autumnal	equinox	for	the	spring	and
autumncrossingsrespectivelyandthestudent	willrecallthatthevernalequinoxisthe
point	from	which	right	ascensions	are	measured.	its	position	among	the	stars	is	found	by
astronomersfromobservationslikethoseabovedescribedonly	made	with	much	more
elaborate	apparatus.
similar	observations	made	in	june	and	december	show	thatthe	sun’s	midday	altitude	is
about	47°	greater	in	summer	than	in	winter.	they	show	also	that	the	sun	is	as	far	north	of
the	equator	in	june	as	he	is	south	of	it	in	december,	from	which	it	is	easily	inferred	that
his	path,	the	ecliptic,	is	inclined	to	the	equator	at	an	angle	of	23°.5,	one	half	of	47°.	this
angle	is	called	the	obliquity	of	the	ecliptic.	the	student	may	recall	that	in	the	geographies
thetorrid	zoneissaidto	extend	23°.5	on	eitherside	ofthe	earth’s	equatoristhere	any
connection	betweentheselimits	andthe	obliquity	ofthe	ecliptic?	wouldit	be	correctto
define	the	torrid	zone	as	that	part	of	the	earth’s	surface	within	which	the	sun	may	at	some
season	of	the	year	pass	through	the	zenith?
exercise	12.—after	a	half	dozen	observations	of	the	sun	have	been	plotted	upon	the	map,
findbymeasurementtherateindegreesperdayatwhichthesunmovesalongthe
ecliptic.	how	many	days	willberequiredforitto	move	completelyaroundtheecliptic
fromvernalequinoxbacktovernalequinoxagainaccurateobservationswiththe
elaborateapparatususedbyprofessionalastronomersshowthatthisperiodwhichis
called	a	tropical	year,	is	365	days	5	hours	48	minutes	46	seconds.	is	this	the	same	as	the
ordinary	year	of	our	calendars?
26.	the	planets.—anyone	whohas	watchedtheskyand	whohas	madethedrawings
prescribed	in	this	chapter	can	hardly	failto	have	found	in	the	course	of	his	observations
some	bright	stars	not	set	down	on	the	printed	star	maps,	and	to	have	found	also	that	these
starsdonotremainfixedinpositionamongtheirfellowsbutwanderaboutfromone
constellationto	another.	observethe	motion	of	one	ofthese	planetsfrom	nightto	night
and	plot	its	positions	on	the	star	map,	precisely	as	was	done	for	the	moon.	what	kind	of
path	does	it	follow?
boththeancientgreeksandthe	moderngermanshavecalledthesebodieswandering
stars,	and	in	english	we	name	them	planets,	which	is	simply	the	greek	word	for	wanderer,
benttoouruse.	besidesthesunand	moonthereareintheheavensfiveplanetseasily
visible	to	the	naked	eye	and,	as	we	shall	see	later,	a	great	number	of	smaller	ones	visible
only	in	the	telescope.	more	than	2,000	years	ago	astronomers	began	observing	the	motion
of	sun,	moon,	and	planets	among	the	stars,	and	endeavored	to	account	for	these	motions
bythetheorythateach	wanderingstar	movedinan	orbitaboutthe	earth.	classicaland
mediævalliterature	are	permeated	withthisidea,	which	was	displaced	only	after	along
strugglebegunbycopernicusa.	dwhotaughtthatthemoonaloneofthese
bodies	revolves	about	the	earth,	while	the	earth	and	the	other	planets	revolve	around	the
sun.	the	ecliptic	is	the	intersection	of	the	plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit	with	the	sky,	and	the
sun	appearsto	move	alongthe	ecliptic	because,	asthe	earth	moves	aroundits	orbitthe
sunisalwaysseenprojectedagainsttheoppositesideofitthe	moonandplanetsall
appear	to	move	near	the	ecliptic	because	the	planes	of	their	orbits	nearly	coincide	with	the
plane	ofthe	earth’s	orbitand	a	narrow	strip	on	eitherside	ofthe	eclipticfollowingits
course	completely	around	the	sky,	is	called	the	zodiac,	a	word	which	may	be	regarded	as
thenameofanarrowstreet(16°	widewithin	whichallthe	wanderingsofthevisible
planetsareconfinedand	outsideof	whichthey	neverventureindeed,	marsistheonly
planet	which	ever	approaches	the	edge	of	the	street,	the	others	traveling	near	the	middle	of
the	road.
fig.	14.—the	apparent	motion	of	a	planet.
fig.	14.—the	apparent	motion	of	a	planet.
27.	a	typical	case	of	planetary	motion.—the	copernicantheory,	enormously	extended
and	developed	through	the	newtonian	law	of	gravitation	(see	chapter	iv),	has	completely
supplanted	the	older	ptolemaic	doctrine,	and	an	illustration	of	the	simple	manner	in	which
it	accounts	for	the	apparently	complicated	motions	of	a	planet	among	the	stars	is	found	in
figsandthefirstofwhichrepresentstheapparentmotionoftheplanetmars
through	the	constellations	aries	and	pisces	during	the	latter	part	of	the	year	1894,	while
thesecondshowsthetrue	motionsof	marsandtheearthintheirorbitsaboutthesun
during	the	same	period.	the	straight	line	in	fig.	14,	with	cross	ruling	upon	it,	is	a	part	of
the	ecliptic,	and	the	numbers	placed	opposite	it	represent	the	distance,	in	degrees,	from	the
vernal	equinox.	in	fig.	15	the	straight	line	represents	the	direction	from	the	sun	toward	the
vernal	equinox,	and	the	angle	which	this	line	makes	with	the	line	joining	earth	and	sun	is
calledtheearth’slongitudetheimaginarylinejoiningtheearthandsuniscalledthe
earth’s	radius	vector,	and	the	pupil	should	note	that	the	longitude	and	length	of	the	radius
vector	taken	together	show	the	direction	and	distance	of	the	earth	from	the	sun—i.	e.,	they
fix	the	relative	positions	of	the	two	bodies.	the	same	is	nearly	true	for	mars	and	would	be
whollytrueifthe	orbit	of	marslayinthesame	plane	withthat	ofthe	earth.	how	does
fig.	14	show	that	the	orbit	of	mars	does	not	lie	exactly	in	the	same	plane	with	the	orbit	of
the	earth?
exercise	13.—findfrom	fig.	15	whatoughttohavebeentheapparentcourseof	mars
among	the	stars	during	the	period	shown	in	the	two	figures,	and	compare	what	you	find
with	fig.	14.	the	apparent	position	of	mars	among	the	stars	is	merely	its	direction	from
the	earth,	and	this	direction	is	represented	in	fig.	14	by	the	distance	of	the	planet	from	the
ecliptic	and	by	its	longitude.
fig.	15.—the	real	motion	of	a	planet.
fig.	15.—the	real	motion	of	a	planet.
thelongitude	of	marsfor	each	date	can	befound	from	fig.	15	by	measuringthe	angle
between	the	straight	line	s	v	and	the	line	drawn	from	the	earth	to	mars.	thus	for	october
12th	we	mayfind	withtheprotractorthattheanglebetweenthelinesvandtheline
joining	the	earth	to	mars	is	a	little	more	than	30°,	and	in	fig.	14	the	position	of	mars	for
this	date	is	shown	nearly	opposite	the	cross	line	corresponding	to	30°	on	the	ecliptic.	just
how	far	below	the	ecliptic	this	position	of	mars	should	fall	can	not	be	told	from	fig.	15,
which	from	necessity	is	constructed	as	if	the	orbits	of	mars	and	the	earth	lay	in	the	same
plane,	and	mars	in	this	case	would	always	appear	to	stand	exactly	on	the	ecliptic	and	to
oscillate	back	and	forth	as	shown	in	fig.	14,	but	withoutthe	up-and-down	motionthere
shown.	in	this	way	plot	in	fig.	14	the	longitudes	of	mars	as	seen	from	the	earth	for	other
dates	and	observe	how	the	forward	motion	of	the	two	planets	in	their	orbits	accounts	for
the	apparently	capricious	motion	of	mars	to	and	fro	among	the	stars.
fig.	16.—the	orbits	of	jupiter	and	saturn.
fig.	16.—the	orbits	of	jupiter	and	saturn.
28.	the	orbits	of	the	planets.—each	planet,	great	or	small,	moves	in	its	own	appropriate
orbitaboutthesunandtheexactdeterminationoftheseorbitstheirsizesshapes,
positions,	etc.,	has	been	one	of	the	great	problems	of	astronomy	for	more	than	2,000	years,
inwhichsuccessivegenerationsofastronomershavestriventopushtoastillhigher
degree	ofaccuracythe	knowledge	attained	bytheir	predecessors.	withoutattemptingto
enter	into	the	details	of	this	problem	we	may	say,	generally,	that	every	planet	moves	in	a
plane	passing	through	the	sun,	and	for	the	six	planets	visible	to	the	naked	eye	these	planes
nearly	coincide,	so	that	the	six	orbits	may	all	be	shown	without	much	error	as	lying	in	the
flat	surface	of	one	map.	it	is,	however,	more	convenient	to	use	two	maps,	such	as	figs.	16
and	17,	one	of	which	showsthe	group	of	planets,	mercury,	venusthe	earthand	mars,
which	are	near	the	sun,	and	on	this	account	are	sometimes	called	the	inner	planets,	while
theothershowsthemoredistantplanetsjupiterandsaturntogetherwiththeearth,
whose	orbit	is	thus	made	to	serve	as	a	connecting	link	between	the	two	diagrams.	these
diagramsareaccuratelydrawntoscaleandareintendedtobeusedbythestudentfor
accurate	measurement	in	connection	with	the	exercises	and	problems	which	follow.
inadditiontothesixplanetsshowninthefiguresthesolarsystemcontainstwolarge
planets	and	several	hundred	small	ones,	for	the	most	part	invisible	to	the	naked	eye,	which
are	omitted	in	order	to	avoid	confusing	the	diagrams.
29.	jupiter	and	saturn.—in	fig.	16	the	sun	at	the	center	is	encircled	by	the	orbits	of	the
three	planets,	and	inclosing	all	of	these	is	a	circular	border	showing	the	directions	from	the
sun	of	the	constellations	which	lie	along	the	zodiac.	the	student	must	note	carefully	that	it
is	only	the	directions	of	these	constellations	that	are	correctly	shown,	and	that	in	order	to
show	them	at	allthey	have	been	placed	very	muchtoo	closetothe	sun.	the	crosslines
extending	from	the	orbit	of	the	earth	toward	the	sun	with	roman	numerals	opposite	them
showthepositionsoftheearthinitsorbitonthefirstdayofjanuary(ifirstdayof
february	(ii),	etc.,	andthe	similarlines	attachedtothe	orbits	of	jupiter	and	saturn	with
arabic	numeralsshowthe	positions	ofthose	planets	onthefirst	day	ofjanuary	of	each
year	indicated,	so	that	the	figure	serves	to	show	not	only	the	orbits	of	the	planets,	but	their
actual	positionsintheir	orbitsfor	something	morethanthefirst	decade	ofthetwentieth
century.
thelinedrawnfromthesuntowardtherightofthefigureshowsthedirectiontothe
vernal	equinox.	it	forms	one	side	of	the	angle	which	measures	a	planet’s	longitude.
fig.	17.—the	orbits	of	the	inner	planets.
fig.	17.—the	orbits	of	the	inner	planets.
exercise	14.—measure	with	your	protractor	the	longitude	of	the	earth	on	january	1st.	is
this	longitude	the	same	in	all	years?	measure	the	longitude	of	jupiter	on	january	1,	1900;
on	july	1,	1900;	on	september	25,	1906.
draw	neatly	on	the	map	a	pencilline	connecting	the	position	ofthe	earth	for	january	1,
1900,	with	the	position	of	jupiter	for	the	same	date,	and	produce	the	line	beyond	jupiter
untilit	meets	the	circle	of	the	constellations.	this	line	represents	the	direction	of	jupiter
from	the	earth,	and	points	toward	the	constellation	in	which	the	planet	appears	at	that	date.
but	this	representation	of	the	place	of	jupiter	in	the	sky	is	not	a	very	accurate	one,	since
on	the	scale	of	the	diagram	the	stars	are	in	fact	more	than	100,000	times	as	far	off	as	they
are	shown	in	the	figure,	and	the	pencil	mark	does	not	meet	the	line	of	constellations	at	the
sameintersectionitwouldhaveifthislinewerepushedbacktoitstruepositionto
remedy	this	defect	we	must	draw	another	line	from	the	sun	parallel	to	the	one	first	drawn,
and	its	intersection	with	the	constellations	will	give	very	approximately	the	true	position
of	jupiter	in	the	sky.
exercise	15.—findthe	present	positions	of	jupiter	and	saturn,	andlookthem	upinthe
sky	by	means	of	your	star	maps.	the	planets	will	appear	in	the	indicated	constellations	as
very	bright	stars	not	shown	on	the	map.
which	of	the	planets,	jupiter	and	saturn,	changes	its	direction	from	the	sun	more	rapidly?
which	travels	the	greater	number	of	miles	per	day?	when	will	jupiter	and	saturn	be	in	the
same	constellation?	does	the	earth	move	faster	or	slower	than	jupiter?
the	distance	of	jupiter	or	saturn	from	the	earth	at	any	time	may	be	readily	obtained	from
the	figure.	thus,	by	direct	measurement	with	the	millimeter	scale	we	find	for	january	1,
1900,	the	distance	of	jupiter	from	the	earth	is	6.1	times	the	distance	of	the	sun	from	the
earthandthismaybeturnedintomilesbymultiplyingitbywhichis
approximately	the	distance	of	the	sun	from	the	earth.	for	most	purposes	it	is	quite	as	well
todispensewiththismultiplicationandcallthedistanceastronomicalunits,
remembering	that	the	astronomical	unit	is	the	distance	of	the	sun	from	the	earth.
exercise	16.—what	is	jupiter’s	distance	from	the	earth	atits	nearest	approach?	whatis
the	greatest	distance	it	ever	attains?	is	jupiter’s	least	distance	from	the	earth	greater	or	less
than	its	least	distance	from	saturn?
on	what	day	in	the	year	1906	will	the	earth	be	on	line	between	jupiter	and	the	sun?	on
this	day	jupiteris	saidto	bein	opposition—i.	ethe	planet	andthe	sun	are	on	opposite
sidesoftheearthandjupiterthencomestothemeridianofanyandeveryplaceat
midnight.	when	the	sun	is	between	the	earth	and	jupiter	(at	what	date	in	1906?)	the	planet
is	said	to	be	in	conjunction	with	the	sun,	and	of	course	passes	the	meridian	with	the	sun	at
noon.	can	you	determine	from	the	figure	the	time	at	which	jupiter	comes	to	the	meridian
at	other	dates	than	opposition	and	conjunction?	can	you	determine	when	it	is	visible	in	the
evening	hours?	tell	from	the	figure	what	constellation	is	on	the	meridian	at	midnight	on
january	1st.	will	it	be	the	same	constellation	in	every	year?
30.	mercuryvenusandmars.—figwhichrepresentstheorbitsoftheinner
planets,	differsfrom	fig.	16	onlyinthe	method	offixingthe	positions	ofthe	planetsin
their	orbits	at	any	given	date.	the	motion	of	these	planets	is	so	rapid,	on	account	of	their
proximity	to	the	sun,	that	it	would	not	do	to	mark	their	positions	as	was	done	for	jupiter
and	saturn,	and	with	the	exception	of	the	earth	they	do	not	always	return	to	the	same	place
on	the	same	day	in	each	year.	it	is	therefore	necessary	to	adopt	a	slightly	different	method,
as	follows:	the	straight	line	extending	from	the	sun	toward	the	vernal	equinox,	v,	is	called
the	prime	radius,	and	we	know	from	past	observations	that	the	earth	in	its	motion	around
the	sun	crosses	this	line	on	september	23d	in	each	year,	and	to	fix	the	earth’s	position	for
september	23dinthe	diagram	we	have	onlytotakethe	point	at	whichthe	prime	radius
intersects	the	earth’s	orbit.	a	month	later,	on	october	23d,	the	earth	will	no	longer	be	at
this	point,	but	will	have	moved	on	along	its	orbit	to	the	point	marked	30	(thirty	days	after
september	23d).	sixty	days	after	september	23d	it	will	be	at	the	point	marked	60,	etc.,	and
foranydatewehaveonlytofindthenumberofdaysinterveningbetweenitandthe
preceding	september	23d,	and	this	number	will	show	at	once	the	position	of	the	earth	in
its	orbit.	thus	for	the	date	july	4,	1900,	we	find
1900,	july	4	-	1899,	september	23	=	284	days,
and	the	little	circle	marked	upon	the	earth’s	orbit	between	the	numbers	270	and	300	shows
the	position	of	the	earth	on	that	date.
in	what	constellation	wasthe	sun	on	july	4,	1900?	what	zodiacal	constellation	cameto
the	meridian	at	midnight	on	that	date?	what	other	constellations	came	to	the	meridian	at
the	same	time?
the	positions	of	the	other	planets	in	their	orbits	are	found	in	the	same	manner,	save	that
they	do	not	cross	the	prime	radius	on	the	same	date	in	each	year,	and	the	times	at	which
they	do	cross	it	must	be	taken	from	the	following	table:
table	of	epochs
a.	dmercuryvenusearthmars.
period88.0	days224.7	days365.25	days687.1	daysfeb.	18thjan.	11thsept.	23dapril	28thfeb.	5thapril	5thsept.	23djan.	23djune	29thsept.	23dmarch	16thapril	8thfeb.	8thsept.	23dmarch	25th.may	3dsept.	23dfeb.	1stmarch	12thjuly	26thsept.	23ddec.	19thfeb.	27thmarch	8thsept.	23dfeb.	14thmay	31stsept.	23dnov.	6thfeb.	1stjan.	11thsept.	23djan.	18thapril	4thsept.	23dsept.	23djan.	5thjune	28thsept.	23d…
the	first	line	of	figures	in	this	table	shows	the	number	of	days	that	each	of	these	planets
requires	to	make	a	complete	revolution	about	the	sun,	and	it	appears	from	these	numbers
that	mercury	makes	about	four	revolutions	in	its	orbit	per	year,	and	therefore	crosses	the
prime	radius	four	times	in	each	year,	while	the	other	planets	are	decidedly	slower	in	their
movements.	thefollowinglines	ofthetableshowfor	each	yearthe	date	at	which	each
planet	first	crossed	the	prime	radius	in	that	year;	the	dates	of	subsequent	crossings	in	any
year	can	be	found	by	adding	once,	twice,	or	three	times	the	period	to	the	given	date,	and
the	table	may	be	extended	to	later	years,	if	need	be,	by	continuously	adding	multiples	of
the	period.	in	the	case	of	mars	it	appears	that	there	is	only	about	one	year	out	of	two	in
which	this	planet	crosses	the	prime	radius.
after	the	date	at	which	the	planet	crosses	the	prime	radius	has	been	determined	its	position
for	any	required	date	is	found	exactly	as	in	the	case	of	the	earth,	and	the	constellation	in
which	the	planet	will	appear	from	the	earth	is	found	as	explained	above	in	connection	with
jupiter	and	saturn.
the	broken	lines	in	the	figure	represent	the	construction	for	finding	the	places	in	the	sky
occupied	by	mercury,	venus,	and	mars	on	july	4,	1900.	letthestudent	make	asimilar
construction	and	find	the	positions	of	these	planets	atthe	present	time.	look	them	up	in
the	sky	and	see	if	they	are	where	your	work	puts	them.
31.	exercises.—the	“evening	star”	is	a	term	loosely	applied	to	any	planet	which	is	visible
inthe	westernsky	soon	aftersunsetitiseasytoseethatsuch	a	planet	must	befarther
toward	the	east	in	the	sky	than	is	the	sun,	and	in	either	fig.	16	or	fig.	17	any	planet	which
viewed	from	the	position	of	the	earth	lies	to	the	left	of	the	sun	and	not	more	than	50°	away
from	it	will	be	an	evening	star.	if	to	the	right	of	the	sun	it	is	a	morning	star,	and	may	be
seen	in	the	eastern	sky	shortly	before	sunrise.
what	planet	is	the	evening	star	now?	is	there	more	than	one	evening	star	at	a	time?	what
is	the	morning	star	now?
do	mercury,	venusor	marseverappearinopposition?	whatisthe	maximum	angular
distance	from	the	sun	at	which	venus	can	ever	be	seen?	why	is	mercury	a	more	difficult
planet	to	see	than	venus?	in	what	month	of	the	year	does	mars	come	nearest	to	the	earth?
will	it	always	be	brighter	in	this	month	than	in	any	other?	which	of	all	the	planets	comes
nearest	to	the	earth?
the	earth	always	comes	to	the	same	longitude	on	the	same	day	of	each	year.	why	is	not
this	true	of	the	other	planets?
the	student	should	remember	that	in	one	respect	figs.	16	and	17	are	not	altogether	correct
representationssincetheyshowtheorbitsasalllyinginthesameplaneifthiswere
strictly	true,	every	planet	would	move,	like	the	sun,	always	along	the	ecliptic;	but	in	fact
alloftheorbitsaretiltedalittleoutoftheplane	oftheeclipticandevery	planetinits
motion	deviates	a	little	from	the	ecliptic,	first	to	one	side	then	to	the	other;	but	not	even
mars,	whichisthe	mosterraticinthisrespectevergets	morethaneightdegreesaway
from	the	ecliptic,	and	for	the	most	part	all	of	them	are	much	closer	to	the	ecliptic	than	this
limit.

chapter	iv
celestial	mechanics
32.	the	beginnings	of	celestial	mechanics.—from	the	earliest	dawn	of	civilization,	long
before	the	beginnings	of	written	history,	the	motions	of	sun	and	moon	and	planets	among
the	stars	from	constellation	to	constellation	had	commanded	the	attention	of	thinking	men,
particularlyoftheclassofprieststhereligionsof	whichthey	weretheguardiansand
teachers	stood	in	closest	relations	with	the	movements	of	the	stars,	and	their	own	power
and	influence	were	increased	by	a	knowledge	of	them.
isaac	newton	(1643-1727).
isaac	newton	(1643-1727).
out	of	these	professional	needs,	as	well	as	from	a	spirit	of	scientific	research,	there	grew
upandflourishedfor	manycenturiesastudyofthe	motionsoftheplanetssimpleand
crudeatfirstbecausetheobservationsthatcouldthen	be	made	wereatbestbutrough
ones,	but	growing	more	accurate	and	more	complex	as	the	development	of	the	mechanic
artsputbetterand	morepreciseinstrumentsintothehandsofastronomersandenabled
them	to	observe	with	increasing	accuracy	the	movements	of	these	bodies.	it	was	early	seen
that	while	for	the	most	part	the	planets,	including	the	sun	and	moon,	traveled	through	the
constellations	from	west	to	east,	some	of	them	sometimes	reversed	their	motion	and	for	a
time	traveled	in	the	opposite	way.	this	clearly	can	not	be	explained	by	the	simple	theory
which	had	early	been	adopted	that	a	planet	moves	always	in	the	same	direction	around	a
circular	orbit	having	the	earth	at	its	center,	and	so	it	was	said	to	move	around	in	a	small
circularorbitcalledanepicyclewhosecenterwassituateduponandmovedalonga
circularorbitcalledthedeferentwithinwhichtheearthwasplacedasisshownin
fig.	18,	wherethesmallcircleistheepicyclethelargecircleisthedeferent,	pisthe
planet,	and	e	the	earth.	when	this	proved	inadequate	to	account	for	the	really	complicated
movementsoftheplanetsanotherepicyclewasputontopofthefirstoneandthen
another	and	another,	until	the	supposed	system	became	so	complicated	that	copernicus,	a
polish	astronomer,	repudiated	its	fundamental	theorem	and	taught	that	the	motions	of	the
planetstake	place	in	circles	around	the	sun	instead	of	aboutthe	earth,	and	thatthe	earth
itselfis	only	one	ofthe	planets	moving	aroundthesuninits	own	appropriate	orbitand
itselflargely	responsible	forthe	seemingly	erratic	movements	ofthe	other	planets,	since
from	day	to	day	we	see	them	and	observe	their	positions	from	different	points	of	view.
fig.	18.—epicycle	and	deferent.	fig.	18.—epicycle	and	deferent.
33.	kepler’slaws.—twogenerationslatercame	kepler	withhisthreefamouslawsof
planetary	motion:
i.	every	planet	moves	in	an	ellipse	which	has	the	sun	at	one	of	its	foci.
ii.	the	radius	vector	of	each	planet	moves	over	equal	areas	in	equal	times.
iii.	the	squares	of	the	periodic	times	of	the	planets	are	proportional	to	the	cubes	of	their
mean	distances	from	the	sun.
theselawsarethecrowningglorynotonlyof	kepler’scareerbutofallastronomical
discoveryfromthebeginninguptohistimeandtheywelldeservecarefulstudyand
explanation,	although	more	modern	progress	has	shown	that	they	are	only	approximately
true.
exercise	17.—drivetwo	pinsinto	asmooth	board	aninch	apartandfastentothemthe
ends	of	a	string	a	foot	long.	take	up	the	slack	of	the	string	with	the	point	of	a	lead	pencil
andkeepingthestringdrawntautmovethepencilpointovertheboardintoevery
possible	position.	the	curve	thus	traced	will	be	an	ellipse	having	the	pins	at	the	two	points
which	are	called	its	foci.
inthe	case	ofthe	planetary	orbits	onefocus	ofthe	ellipseis	vacantandin	accordance
with	the	first	law,	the	center	of	the	sun	is	at	the	other	focus.	in	fig.	17	the	dot,	inside	the
orbit	of	mercury,	which	is	marked	a,	shows	the	position	of	the	vacant	focus	of	the	orbit	of
mars,	andthe	dot	bisthe	vacantfocus	of	mercury’s	orbit.	the	orbits	of	venus	andthe
eartharesonearlycircularthattheirvacantfocilieveryclosetothesunandarenot
marked	in	the	figure.	the	line	drawn	from	the	sun	to	any	point	of	the	orbit	(the	string	from
pin	to	pencil	point)	is	a	radius	vector.	the	point	midway	between	the	pins	is	the	center	of
the	ellipse,	and	the	distance	of	either	pin	from	the	center	measures	the	eccentricity	of	the
ellipse.
drawseveralellipseswiththesamelengthofstringbutwiththepinsatdifferent
distances	apart,	and	note	that	the	greater	the	eccentricity	the	flatter	is	the	ellipse,	but	that
all	of	them	have	the	same	length.
if	both	pins	were	driven	into	the	same	hole,	what	kind	of	an	ellipse	would	you	get?
the	second	law	was	worked	out	by	kepler	as	his	answer	to	a	problem	suggested	by	the
first	law.	in	fig.	17	it	is	apparent	from	a	mere	inspection	of	the	orbit	of	mercury	that	this
planet	travels	much	faster	on	one	side	of	its	orbit	than	on	the	other,	the	distance	covered	in
ten	days	between	the	numbers	10	and	20	being	more	than	fifty	per	cent	greater	than	that
between	50	and	60.	the	same	difference	is	found,	though	usually	in	less	degree,	for	every
other	planet,	and	kepler’s	problem	was	to	discover	a	means	by	which	to	mark	upon	the
orbit	the	figures	showing	the	positions	of	the	planet	at	the	end	of	equal	intervals	of	time.
hissolutionofthisproblemcontainedinthesecondlawassertsthatif	wedrawradii
vectors	from	the	sun	to	each	of	the	marked	points	taken	at	equal	time	intervals	around	the
orbitthentheareaofthesectorformedbytwoadjacentradiivectoresandthearc
included	between	them	is	equal	to	the	area	of	each	and	every	other	such	sector,	the	short
radii	vectores	being	spread	apart	so	as	to	include	a	long	arc	between	them	while	the	long
radiivectoreshaveashortarcin	kepler’sform	ofstatingthelawtheradiusvectoris
supposed	to	travel	with	the	planet	and	in	each	day	to	sweep	over	the	same	fractional	part
of	the	total	area	of	the	orbit.	the	spacing	of	the	numbers	in	fig.	17	was	done	by	means	of
this	law.
fortheproperunderstandingofkepler’sthirdlawwemustnotethatthe“mean
distance”	whichappearsinitisonehalfofthelongdiameteroftheorbitandthatthe
“periodictimemeansthenumberofdaysoryearsrequiredbytheplanettomakea
complete	circuit	in	its	orbit.	representing	the	first	of	these	by	a	and	the	second	by	t,	we
have,	as	the	mathematical	equivalent	of	the	law,
a3	÷	t2	=	c
where	the	quotient,	c,	is	a	number	which,	as	kepler	found,	is	the	same	for	every	planet	of
thesolarsystemif	wetakethe	meandistanceoftheearthfromthesunastheunitof
distance,	andthe	year	asthe	unit	oftime,	we	shallfind	by	applyingthe	equationtothe
earth’s	motion,	c	=	1.	applying	this	value	to	any	other	planet	we	shallfind	inthe	same
units,	a	=	t2/3,	by	means	of	which	we	may	determine	the	distance	of	any	planet	from	the
sun	when	its	periodic	time,	t,	has	been	learned	from	observation.
exercise	18.—uranus	requires	84	years	to	make	a	revolution	in	its	orbit.	what	is	its	mean
distance	from	the	sun?	what	are	the	mean	distances	of	mercury,	venus,	and	mars?	(see
chapteriiifortheirperiodictimes.)	woulditbepossiblefortwoplanetsatdifferent
distances	from	the	sun	to	move	around	their	orbits	in	the	same	time?
a	circleis	an	ellipsein	whichthetwo	foci	have	been	broughttogether.	would	kepler’s
laws	hold	true	for	such	an	orbit?
34.	newton’s	laws	of	motion.—kepler	studied	and	describedthe	motion	ofthe	planets.
newton,	three	generations	later	(1727	a.	d.),	studied	and	described	the	mechanism	which
controlsthatmotiontokeplerandhisagetheheavensweresupernaturalwhileto
newton	and	his	successorsthey	are	a	part	of	nature,	governed	bythe	samelaws	which
obtain	upon	the	earth,	and	we	turn	to	the	ordinary	things	of	everyday	life	as	the	foundation
of	celestial	mechanics.
every	one	who	has	ridden	a	bicycle	knows	that	he	can	coast	farther	upon	a	level	road	if	it
is	smooth	than	if	it	is	rough;	but	however	smooth	and	hard	the	road	may	be	and	however
fast	the	wheel	may	have	been	started,	it	is	sooner	or	later	stopped	by	the	resistance	which
the	road	and	the	air	offer	to	its	motion,	and	when	once	stopped	or	checked	it	can	be	started
again	only	by	applying	fresh	power.	we	have	here	a	familiar	illustration	of	what	is	called
the	first	law	of	motion.—“every	body	continues	in	its	state	of	rest	or	of	uniform	motion
in	a	straight	line	except	in	so	far	as	it	may	be	compelled	by	force	to	change	that	state.”	a
gust	of	wind,	a	stone,	a	careless	movement	of	the	rider	may	turn	the	bicycle	to	the	right	or
theleftbutunlesssomedisturbingforceisappliedit	willgostraightaheadandifall
resistance	to	its	motion	could	be	removed	it	would	go	always	at	the	speed	given	it	by	the
last	power	applied,	swerving	neither	to	the	one	hand	nor	the	other.
when	a	slow	rider	increases	his	speed	we	recognize	at	once	that	he	has	applied	additional
power	to	the	wheel,	and	when	this	speed	is	slackened	it	equally	shows	that	force	has	been
applied	against	the	motion.	it	is	force	alone	which	can	produce	a	change	in	either	velocity
or	direction	of	motion;	but	simple	as	this	law	now	appears	it	required	the	genius	of	galileo
to	discover	it	and	of	newton	to	give	it	the	form	in	which	it	is	stated	above.
35.	the	second	law	of	motion,	which	is	also	due	to	galileo	and	newton,	is:
“change	of	motion	is	proportional	to	force	applied	and	takes	place	in	the	direction	of	the
straight	line	in	which	the	force	acts.”	suppose	a	man	to	fall	from	a	balloon	at	some	great
elevationintheairhisown	weightistheforce	whichpullshimdownandthatforce
operating	at	every	instant	is	sufficient	to	give	him	at	the	end	of	the	first	second	of	his	fall	a
downwardvelocityoffeetpersecond—ieithaschangedhisstatefromrestto
motionatthisrateandthemotionistowardtheearthbecausetheforceactsinthat
direction.	during	the	next	second	the	ceaseless	operation	of	this	force	will	have	the	same
effect	as	in	the	first	second	and	will	add	another	32	feet	to	his	velocity,	so	that	two	seconds
from	the	time	he	commenced	to	fall	he	will	be	moving	at	the	rate	of	64	feet	per	second,
etc.	the	column	of	figures	marked	v	in	the	table	below	shows	what	his	velocity	will	be	at
the	end	of	subsequent	seconds.	the	changing	velocity	here	shown	is	the	change	of	motion
to	whichthelawrefersandthevelocityisproportionaltothetimeshowninthefirst
column	of	the	table,	because	the	amount	of	force	exerted	in	this	case	is	proportional	to	the
timeduringwhichitoperatedthedistancethroughwhichthemanwillfallineach
secondisshowninthecolumnmarkeddandisfoundbytakingtheaverageofhis
velocity	at	the	beginning	and	end	of	this	second,	and	the	total	distance	through	which	he
has	fallen	at	the	end	of	each	second,	marked	s	in	the	table,	is	found	by	taking	the	sum	of
all	the	preceding	values	of	d.	the	velocity,	32	feet	per	second,	which	measures	the	change
ofmotionineachsecondalsomeasurestheacceleratingforcewhichproducesthis
motion,	and	it	is	usually	represented	in	formulæ	by	the	letter	g.	let	the	student	show	from
the	numbers	in	the	table	that	the	accelerating	force,	the	time,	t,	during	which	it	operates,
and	the	space,	s,	fallen	through,	satisfy	the	relation
s	=	1/2	gt2,
which	is	usually	called	the	law	of	falling	bodies.	how	does	the	table	show	that	g	is	equal
to	32?
table
tvds400
etcetcetcetc.
ifthe	balloon	were	half	a	mile	high	how	long	wouldittaketo	falltothe	ground?	what
would	be	the	velocity	just	before	reaching	the	ground?
galileo	galilei	(1564-1642).
galileo	galilei	(1564-1642).
fig.	19	shows	the	path	through	the	air	of	a	ball	which	has	been	struck	by	a	bat	at	the	point
a,	and	started	off	in	the	direction	a	b	with	a	velocity	of	200	feet	per	second.	in	accordance
with	the	first	law	of	motion,	if	it	were	acted	upon	by	no	other	force	than	the	impulse	given
by	the	bat,	it	should	travel	along	the	straight	line	a	b	at	the	uniform	rate	of	200	feet	per
secondandattheendofthefourthseconditshouldbefeetfrom	aatthepoint
marked	4,	but	during	these	four	seconds	its	weight	has	caused	itto	fall	256	feet,	and	its
actual	position,	4’,	is	256	feet	below	the	point	4.	in	this	way	we	find	its	position	at	the	end
of	each	second,	1’,	2’,	3’,	4’,	etc.,	and	drawing	a	line	through	these	points	we	shall	find	the
actual	path	of	the	ball	under	the	influence	of	the	two	forces	to	be	the	curved	line	a	c.	no
matter	how	far	the	ball	may	go	before	striking	the	ground,	it	can	not	get	back	to	the	point
a,	and	the	curve	a	ctherefore	can	not	be	a	part	of	a	circle,	since	that	curve	returns	into
itself.	it	is,	in	fact,	a	part	of	a	parabola,	which,	as	we	shall	see	later,	is	a	kind	of	orbit	in
which	comets	and	some	other	heavenly	bodies	move.	a	skyrocket	moves	in	the	same	kind
of	a	path,	and	so	does	a	stone,	a	bullet,	or	any	other	object	hurled	through	the	air.
fig.	19.—the	path	of	a	ball.
fig.	19.—the	path	of	a	ball.
36.	thethirdlaw	of	motion.—“to	everyactionthereisalwaysanequalandcontrary
reactionorthemutualactionsofanytwobodiesarealwaysequalandoppositely
directed.”	this	is	well	illustrated	in	the	case	of	a	man	climbing	a	rope	hand	over	hand.	the
directforceoraction	whichheexertsisadownwardpullupontheropeanditisthe
reaction	of	the	rope	to	this	pull	which	lifts	him	along	it.	we	shall	find	in	a	later	chapter	a
curious	application	of	this	law	to	the	history	of	the	earth	and	moon.
itisthegreatgloryofsirisaac	newtonthathefirstofallmenrecognizedthatthese
simplelawsofmotionholdtrueintheheavensaswellasupontheearththatthe
complicated	motion	of	a	planet,	a	comet,	or	a	star	is	determined	in	accordance	with	these
laws	by	the	forces	which	act	upon	the	bodies,	and	that	these	forces	are	essentially	the	same
as	that	which	we	call	weight.	the	formal	statement	of	the	principle	last	named	is	included
in—
37.	newton’s	law	of	gravitation.—“every	particle	of	matter	in	the	universe	attracts	every
otherparticle	withaforce	whosedirectionisthatofalinejoiningthetwoand	whose
magnitude	is	directly	asthe	product	oftheir	masses,	and	inversely	asthe	square	oftheir
distance	from	each	other.”	we	know	that	we	ourselves	and	the	things	about	us	are	pulled
towardtheearthbyaforce(weightwhichiscalledinthelatinthatnewtonwrote,
gravitas,	and	the	word	marks	well	the	true	significance	of	the	law	of	gravitation.	newton
did	not	discover	a	new	force	in	the	heavens,	but	he	extended	an	old	and	familiar	one	from
alimitedterrestrialsphereofactiontoanunlimitedandcelestialoneandfurnisheda
precise	statement	of	the	way	in	which	the	force	operates.	whether	a	body	be	hot	or	cold,
wetordrysolidliquidorgaseousisofnoaccountindeterminingtheforce	whichit
exerts,	since	this	depends	solely	upon	mass	and	distance.
the	studentshould	perhaps	be	warned	againststrainingtoofarthelanguage	whichitis
customary	to	employ	in	this	connection.	the	law	of	gravitation	is	certainly	a	far-reaching
one,	and	it	may	operate	in	every	remotest	corner	of	the	universe	precisely	as	stated	above,
butadditionalinformationaboutthosecornerswouldbewelcometosupplementour
rather	scanty	stock	of	knowledge	concerning	what	happens	there.	we	may	not	controvert
the	words	of	a	popular	preacher	who	says,	“when	i	lift	my	hand	i	move	the	stars	in	ursa
major,”	but	we	should	not	wish	to	stand	sponsor	for	them,	even	though	they	are	justified
by	a	rigorous	interpretation	of	the	newtonian	law.
the	word	massinthe	statement	ofthelaw	of	gravitation,	meansthe	quantity	of	matter
containedinthebodyandifwerepresentbythelettersmandmtherespective
quantities	of	matter	contained	in	the	two	bodies	whose	distance	from	each	other	is	r,	we
shallhaveinaccordancewiththelawofgravitationthefollowingmathematical
expression	for	the	force,	f,	which	acts	between	them:
f	=	k	(m’m”)/r2.
thisequation,	whichisthegeneral	mathematicalexpressionforthelawofgravitation,
may	be	made	to	yield	some	curious	results.	thus,	if	we	select	two	bullets,	each	having	a
massofgramandplacethemsothattheircentersarecentimeteraparttheabove
expression	for	the	force	exerted	between	them	becomes
f	=	k	{(1	×	1)/12}	=	k,
from	which	it	appears	that	the	coefficient	k	is	the	force	exerted	between	these	bodies.	this
iscalledthegravitationconstantanditevidentlyfurnishesameasureofthespecific
intensity	with	which	one	particle	of	matter	attracts	another.	elaborate	experiments	which
have	been	made	to	determine	the	amount	of	this	force	show	that	itis	surprisingly	small,
forinthecaseofthetwobulletswhosemassofgrameachissupposedtobe
concentrated	into	an	indefinitely	small	space,	gravity	would	have	to	operate	between	them
continuouslyfor	morethanforty	minutesinordertopullthemtogetheralthoughthey
wereseparatedbyonlycentimetertostartwithandnothingsavetheirowninertia
opposed	their	movements.	it	is	only	when	one	or	both	of	the	masses	m’,	m”	are	very	great
that	the	force	of	gravity	becomes	large,	and	the	weight	of	bodies	at	the	surface	of	the	earth
is	considerable	because	of	the	great	quantity	of	matter	which	goes	to	make	up	the	earth.
many	of	the	heavenly	bodies	are	much	more	massive	than	the	earth,	as	the	mathematical
astronomers	have	found	by	applying	the	law	of	gravitation	to	determine	numerically	their
masses,	or,	in	more	popular	language,	to	“weigh”	them.
the	student	should	observe	that	the	two	terms	mass	and	weight	are	not	synonymous;	mass
is	defined	above	as	the	quantity	of	matter	contained	in	a	body,	while	weight	isthe	force
with	which	the	earth	attracts	that	body,	and	in	accordance	with	the	law	of	gravitation	its
weightdependsuponitsdistancefromthecenteroftheearthwhileitsmassisquite
independent	of	its	position	with	respect	to	the	earth.
by	the	third	law	of	motion	the	earth	is	pulled	toward	a	falling	body	just	as	strongly	as	the
bodyis	pulledtowardthe	earth—i.	e.,	by	aforce	equaltothe	weight	ofthe	body.	how
much	does	the	earth	rise	toward	the	body?
38.	the	motionofaplanet.—infig20	srepresentsthesunand	paplanetorother
celestial	body,	which	for	the	moment	is	moving	along	the	straight	line	p	1.	in	accordance
withthefirstlawofmotionitwouldcontinuetomovealongthislinewithuniform
velocity	if	no	external	force	acted	upon	it;	but	such	a	force,	the	sun’s	attraction,	is	acting,
and	by	virtue	of	this	attraction	the	body	is	pulled	aside	from	the	line	p	1.
knowing	the	velocity	and	direction	of	the	body’s	motion	and	the	force	with	which	the	sun
attracts	it,	the	mathematician	is	able	to	apply	newton’s	laws	of	motion	so	as	to	determine
the	path	ofthe	body,	and	a	few	ofthe	possible	orbits	are	shown	inthe	figure	wherethe
short	cross	stroke	marks	the	point	of	each	orbit	which	is	nearest	to	the	sun.	this	point	is
called	the	perihelion.
withoutanyformalapplicationof	mathematics	we	mayreadilyseethattheswifterthe
motion	ofthe	body	at	ptheshorter	will	bethetime	during	whichitissubjectedtothe
sun’s	attraction	at	close	range,	and	therefore	the	force	exerted	by	the	sun,	and	the	resulting
change	of	motion,	will	be	small,	as	in	the	orbits	p	1	and	p	2.
ontheotherhandpandprepresentorbitsinwhichthevelocityatpwas
comparatively	smallandtheresulting	change	of	motion	greaterthan	would	be	possible
for	a	more	swiftly	moving	body.
what	would	be	the	orbit	if	the	velocity	at	p	were	reduced	to	nothing	at	all?
what	would	be	the	effect	if	the	body	starting	at	p	moved	directly	away	from	1?
fig.	20.—different	kinds	of	orbits.	fig.	20.—different	kinds	of	orbits.
the	student	should	not	fail	to	observe	that	the	sun’s	attraction	tends	to	pull	the	body	at	p
forwardalongitspathandthereforeincreasesitsvelocityandthatthisinfluence
continues	until	the	planet	reaches	perihelion,	at	which	point	it	attains	its	greatest	velocity,
andtheforce	ofthesun’s	attractionis	wholly	expendedin	changingthe	direction	ofits
motionaftertheplanethaspassedperihelionthesunbeginstopullbackwardandto
retard	the	motion	in	just	the	same	measure	that	before	perihelion	passage	it	increased	it,	so
thatthetwohalvesoftheorbitonoppositesidesofalinedrawnfromtheperihelion
throughthe	sun	are	exactly	alike.	we	may	here	notethe	explanation	of	kepler’s	second
law:	whentheplanetisnearthesunit	movesfasterandtheradiusvectorchangesits
direction	morerapidlythanwhentheplanetisremotefromthesunonaccountofthe
greater	force	with	which	it	is	attracted,	and	the	exact	relation	between	the	rates	at	which
the	radius	vector	turns	in	different	parts	of	the	orbit,	as	given	by	the	second	law,	depends
upon	the	changes	in	this	force.
whenthevelocityisnottoogreatthesun’sbackwardpullafteraplanethaspassed
perihelion,	finally	overcomes	it	and	turns	the	planet	toward	the	sun	again,	in	such	a	way
that	it	comes	back	to	the	point	p,	moving	in	the	same	direction	and	with	the	same	speed	as
before—i.	e.,	it	has	gone	around	the	sun	in	an	orbit	like	p	6	or	p	4,	an	ellipse,	along	which
it	will	continueto	move	ever	after.	but	we	must	notfailto	notethatthisreturnintothe
same	orbit	is	a	consequence	of	the	last	line	in	the	statement	of	the	law	of	gravitation	(p.
54),	and	that,	if	the	magnitude	of	this	force	were	inversely	as	the	cube	of	the	distance	or
any	other	proportion	than	the	squarethe	orbit	would	be	something	very	different.	ifthe
velocity	is	too	great	for	the	sun’s	attraction	to	overcome,	the	orbit	will	be	a	hyperbola,	like
palong	whichthe	body	will	moveaway	nevertoreturn,	whilea	velocityjustatthe
limit	of	what	the	sun	can	control	gives	an	orbit	like	p	3,	a	parabola,	along	which	the	body
moves	with	parabolic	velocity,	which	is	ever	diminishing	as	the	body	gets	farther	from	the
sun,	but	is	always	just	sufficient	to	keep	it	from	returning.	if	the	earth’s	velocity	could	be
increased	41	per	cent,	from	19	up	to	27	miles	per	second,	it	would	have	parabolic	velocity,
and	would	quit	the	sun’s	company.
the	summation	ofthe	whole	matteristhatthe	orbitin	which	a	body	moves	aroundthe
sun,	or	past	the	sun,	depends	upon	its	velocity	and	if	this	velocity	and	the	direction	of	the
motion	at	any	one	point	in	the	orbit	are	known	the	whole	orbit	is	determined	by	them,	and
the	position	ofthe	planetinits	orbitfor	pastas	wellasfuturetimes	can	be	determined
throughtheapplicationof	newton’slawsandthesameistrueforanyotherheavenly
body—mooncomet,	meteoretcitisinthis	waythatastronomersareabletopredict,
years	in	advance,	in	what	particular	part	of	the	sky	a	given	planet	will	appear	at	a	given
time.
it	is	sometimes	a	source	of	wonder	that	the	planets	move	in	ellipses	instead	of	circles,	but
itiseasilyseenfrom	figthatthe	planet,	pcould	notbyany	possibility	moveina
circle,	since	the	direction	of	its	motion	at	p	is	not	at	right	angles	with	the	line	joining	it	to
thesun	asit	must	beinacircular	orbitand	evenifit	were	perpendiculartotheradius
vector	the	planet	must	needs	have	exactly	the	right	velocity	given	to	it	at	this	point,	since
eithermoreorlessspeedwouldchangethecircleintoanellipseinordertoproduce
circular	motion	there	must	be	a	balancing	of	conditions	as	nice	as	is	required	to	make	a	pin
stand	upon	its	point,	and	the	really	surprising	thing	is	that	the	orbits	of	the	planets	should
be	so	nearly	circular	as	they	are.	if	the	orbit	of	the	earth	were	drawn	accurately	to	scale,
the	untrained	eye	would	not	detect	the	slightest	deviation	from	a	true	circle,	and	even	the
orbitof	mercury(fig.	17),	whichis	much	moreeccentricthanthatoftheearth,	might
almost	pass	for	a	circle.
fig.	21.	an	impossible	orbit.	fig.	21.	an	impossible	orbit.
the	orbit	p	2,	which	lies	between	the	parabola	and	the	straight	line,	is	called	in	geometry	a
hyperbolaandnewtonsucceededinprovingfromthelawofgravitationthatabody
might	move	underthe	sun’s	attraction	in	a	hyperbola	as	well	asin	a	parabola	or	ellipse;
but	it	must	move	in	some	one	of	these	curves;	no	other	orbit	is	possible.[a]	thus	it	would
not	be	possible	for	a	body	moving	under	the	law	of	gravitation	to	describe	about	the	sun
any	such	orbit	as	is	shown	in	fig.	21.	if	the	body	passes	a	second	time	through	any	point
of	its	orbit,	such	as	p	in	the	figure,	then	it	must	retrace,	time	after	time,	the	whole	path	that
it	first	traversed	in	getting	from	p	around	to	p	again—i.	e.,	the	orbit	must	be	an	ellipse.
newtonalsoprovedthatkepler’sthreelawsaremerecorollariesfromthelawof
gravitationandthatto	bestrictlycorrectthethirdlaw	must	beslightlyalteredsoasto
take	into	accountthe	masses	ofthe	planets.	these	are,	however,	so	smallin	comparison
with	that	of	the	sun,	that	the	correction	is	of	comparatively	little	moment.
39.	perturbations.—in	what	precedes	we	have	consideredthe	motion	of	a	planet	under
theinfluenceofnootherforcethanthesun’sattractionwhileinfactasthelawof
gravitation	asserts,	every	other	body	in	the	universe	isin	some	measure	attracting	it	and
changingits	motiontheresultingdisturbancesinthe	motionoftheattractedbodyare
called	perturbations,	butforthe	most	partthese	areinsignificant,	becausethe	bodies	by
whose	disturbing	attractions	they	are	caused	are	either	very	small	or	very	remote,	and	it	is
onlywhenourmovingplanet,	pcomesundertheinfluenceofsomegreatdisturbing
powerlikejupiteroroneoftheotherplanetsthattheperturbationscausedbytheir
influence	need	to	be	taken	into	account.
theproblemofthemotionofthreebodies—sunjupiterplanet—which	mustthenbe
dealt	with	is	vastly	more	complicated	than	that	which	we	have	considered,	and	the	ablest
mathematicians	and	astronomers	have	not	been	able	to	furnish	a	complete	solution	for	it,
althoughthey	have	worked	uponthe	problemfortwo	centuriesand	have	developed	an
immense	amount	of	detailed	information	concerning	it.
the	lick	observatory,	mount	hamilton,	cal.
the	lick	observatory,	mount	hamilton,	cal.
in	general	each	planet	works	ceaselessly	upon	the	orbit	of	every	other,	changing	its	size
and	shape	and	position,	backward	and	forward	in	accordance	with	the	law	of	gravitation,
and	it	is	a	question	of	serious	moment	how	far	this	process	may	extend.	if	the	diameter	of
the	earth’s	orbit	were	very	much	increased	or	diminished	by	the	perturbing	action	of	the
otherplanetstheamountofheatreceivedfromthesunwouldbecorrespondingly
changed,	and	the	earth,	perhaps,	be	rendered	unfitforthe	support	oflife.	thetipping	of
the	plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit	into	a	new	position	might	also	produce	serious	consequences;
but	the	great	french	mathematician	of	a	century	ago,	laplace,	succeeded	in	proving	from
the	law	of	gravitation	that	although	both	of	these	changes	are	actually	in	progress	they	can
not,	at	least	for	millions	of	years,	go	far	enough	to	prove	of	serious	consequence,	and	the
sameistrueforalltheotherplanetsunlesshereandthereanasteroidmayprovean
exception	to	the	rule.
the	precession	(chapter	v)	is	a	striking	illustration	of	a	perturbation	of	slightly	different
character	from	the	above,	and	another	is	found	in	connection	with	the	plane	of	the	moon’s
orbitit	will	berememberedthatthe	mooninits	motion	amongthe	stars	never	goes	far
from	the	ecliptic,	but	in	a	complete	circuit	of	the	heavens	crosses	it	twice,	once	in	going
from	south	to	north	and	once	in	the	opposite	direction.	the	points	at	which	it	crosses	the
eclipticarecalledthe	nodesandundertheperturbinginfluenceofthesunthesenodes
move	westward	along	the	ecliptic	about	twenty	degrees	per	year,	an	extraordinarily	rapid
perturbation,	and	one	of	great	consequence	in	the	theory	of	eclipses.
fig.	22.—a	planet	subject	to	great	perturbations	by	jupiter.	fig.	22.—a	planet	subject
to	great	perturbations	by	jupiterweighingtheplanets.—althoughtheseperturbationscannotbeconsidered
dangerous,	they	are	interesting	since	they	furnish	a	method	for	weighing	the	planets	which
produce	them.	from	the	law	of	gravitation	we	learn	that	the	ability	of	a	planet	to	produce
perturbations	depends	directly	uponits	masssincetheforce	f	whichitexertscontains
this	mass,	m’,	as	a	factor.	so,	too,	the	divisor	r2	in	the	expression	for	the	force	shows	that
the	distance	between	the	disturbing	and	disturbed	bodies	is	a	matter	of	great	consequence,
forthesmallerthe	distancethe	greatertheforce.	whenthereforethe	mass	ofa	planet
such	as	jupiter	isto	be	determined	from	the	perturbations	it	producesitis	customary	to
select	some	such	opportunity	asis	presentedin	fig.	22,	where	one	ofthe	small	planets,
calledasteroidsisrepresentedas	movinginaveryeccentricorbit,	whichatonepoint
approaches	close	to	the	orbit	of	jupiter,	and	at	another	place	comes	near	to	the	orbit	of	the
earth.	for	the	most	part	jupiter	will	not	exert	any	very	great	disturbing	influence	upon	a
planet	moving	in	such	an	orbit	as	this,	since	it	is	only	at	rare	intervals	that	the	asteroid	and
jupiter	approach	so	close	to	each	other,	as	is	shown	in	the	figure.	the	time	during	which
the	asteroid	is	little	affected	by	the	attraction	of	jupiter	is	used	to	study	the	motion	given
to	it	by	the	sun’s	attraction—that	is,	to	determine	carefully	the	undisturbed	orbit	in	which
it	moves;	but	there	comes	a	time	at	which	the	asteroid	passes	close	to	jupiter,	as	shown	in
the	figure,	and	the	orbital	motion	which	the	sun	imparts	to	it	will	then	be	greatly	disturbed,
and	when	the	planet	next	comes	round	to	the	part	of	its	orbit	near	the	earth	the	effect	of
these	disturbances	uponits	apparent	positioninthe	sky	will	be	exaggerated	byits	close
proximity	to	the	earth.	if	now	the	astronomer	observes	the	actual	position	of	the	asteroid
intheskyitsrightascensionanddeclinationandcomparesthesewiththeposition
assigned	to	the	planet	by	the	law	of	gravitation	when	the	attraction	of	jupiter	is	ignored,
thedifferencesbetweentheobservedrightascensionsanddeclinationsandthose
computed	uponthetheory	of	undisturbed	motion	will	measuretheinfluencethat	jupiter
has	had	upon	the	asteroid,	and	the	amount	by	which	jupiter	has	shifted	it,	compared	with
the	amount	by	which	the	sun	has	moved	it—that	is,	with	the	motion	in	its	orbit—furnishes
the	mass	of	jupiter	expressed	as	a	fractional	part	of	the	mass	of	the	sun.
therehasbeen	determinedinthis	mannerthe	massofevery	planetinthesolarsystem
which	is	large	enough	to	produce	any	appreciable	perturbation,	and	all	these	masses	prove
tobeexceedinglysmallfractionsofthemassofthesunasmaybeseenfromthe
following	table,	in	which	is	given	opposite	the	name	of	each	planet	the	number	by	which
the	mass	of	the	sun	must	be	divided	in	order	to	get	the	mass	of	the	planet:
mercury7,000,000	(?)
venus408,000
earth329,000
mars3,093,500
jupiter1,047.4
saturn3,502
uranus22,800
neptune19,700
it	is	to	be	especially	noted	that	the	mass	given	for	each	planet	includes	the	mass	of	all	the
satellites	which	attend	it,	since	their	influence	was	felt	in	the	perturbations	from	which	the
mass	was	derived.	thus	the	mass	assigned	to	the	earth	is	the	combined	mass	of	earth	and
moon.
41.	discoveryofneptune.—themostfamousexampleofperturbationsisfoundin
connection	with	the	discovery,	in	the	year	1846,	of	neptune,	the	outermost	planet	of	the
solarsystemformanyyearsthemotionofuranushisnextneighborhadproveda
puzzle	to	astronomers.	in	accordance	with	kepler’s	first	law	this	planet	should	move	in	an
ellipse	having	the	sun	at	one	of	its	foci,	but	no	ellipse	could	be	found	which	exactly	fitted
itsobservedpathamongthestarsalthoughtobesurethemisfitwasnotvery
pronounced.	astronomers	surmised	that	the	small	deviations	of	uranus	from	the	best	path
whichtheorycombined	withobservationcouldassign,	wereduetoperturbationsinits
motioncausedbyanunknownplanetmoreremotefromthesun—athingeasyto
conjecture	but	hardto	proveand	harderstilltofindthe	unknown	disturber.	but	almost
simultaneously	two	young	men,	adams	in	england	and	le	verrier	in	france,	attacked	the
problem	quite	independently	of	each	other,	and	carried	it	to	a	successful	solution,	showing
thatiftheirregularitiesinthemotionofuranuswereindeedcausedbyanunknown
planet,	then	that	planet	must,	in	september,	1846,	be	in	the	direction	of	the	constellation
aquariusandthereitwasfoundonseptember23dbytheastronomersoftheberlin
observatory	whom	le	verrier	had	invited	to	search	for	it,	and	found	within	a	degree	of	the
exact	point	which	the	law	of	gravitation	in	his	hands	had	assigned	to	it.
this	working	backward	from	the	perturbations	experienced	by	uranus	to	the	cause	which
producedthemisjustlyregardedasoneofthegreatestscientificachievementsofthe
human	intellect,	and	it	is	worthy	of	note	that	we	are	approaching	the	time	at	which	it	may
be	repeated,	for	neptune	now	behaves	much	as	did	uranus	three	quarters	of	a	century	ago,
and	the	most	plausible	explanation	which	can	be	offered	for	these	anomalies	in	its	path	is
that	the	bounds	of	the	solar	system	must	be	again	enlarged	to	include	another	disturbing
planet.
42.	the	shape	of	a	planet.—there	is	an	effect	of	gravitation	not	yet	touched	upon,	which
isofconsiderableinterestandwideapplicationinastronomy—vizitsinfluencein
determining	the	shape	of	the	heavenly	bodies.	the	earth	is	a	globe	because	every	part	of	it
is	drawn	toward	the	center	by	the	attraction	of	the	other	parts,	and	if	this	attraction	on	its
surface	were	everywhere	of	equal	forcethe	material	ofthe	earth	would	be	crushed	by	it
intoatrulysphericalformnomatterwhatmayhavebeentheshapeinwhichitwas
originally	madebutsuchisnottherealconditionoftheearthforitsdiurnalrotation
develops	in	every	particle	ofits	body	a	force	which	is	sometimes	called	centrifugal,	but
which	is	really	nothing	more	than	the	inertia	of	its	particles,	which	tend	at	every	moment
to	keep	unchangedthe	direction	oftheir	motion	and	whichthus	resistthe	attractionthat
pulls	them	into	a	circular	path	marked	out	by	the	earth’s	rotation,	just	as	a	stone	tied	at	the
endofastringandswungswiftlyinacirclepullsuponthestringandopposesthe
constraint	which	keepsit	movinginacircle.	afew	experiments	withsuchastone	will
show	that	the	faster	it	goes	the	harder	does	it	pull	upon	the	string,	and	the	same	is	true	of
eachparticleoftheearththeswiftlymovingonesneartheequatorhavingagreater
centrifugal	force	than	the	slow	ones	near	the	poles.	at	the	equator	the	centrifugal	force	is
directly	opposed	to	the	force	of	gravity,	and	in	effect	diminishes	it,	so	that,	comparatively,
thereisanexcess	of	gravityatthe	poles	which	compressestheearthalongitsaxisand
causes	itto	bulge	out	atthe	equator	until	a	balance	is	thus	restored.	as	we	have	learned
from	the	study	of	geography,	in	the	case	of	the	earth,	this	compression	amounts	to	about
27	milesbutinthelargerplanetsjupiterand	saturnitis	muchgreateramountingto
several	thousand	miles.
but	rotation	is	not	the	only	influence	that	tends	to	pull	a	planet	out	of	shape.	the	attraction
which	the	earth	exerts	upon	the	moon	is	stronger	on	the	near	side	and	weaker	on	the	far
side	of	oursatellitethan	atits	centerandthis	difference	of	attractiontendsto	warpthe
moon,	as	is	illustrated	in	fig.	23	where	1,	2,	and	3	represent	pieces	of	iron	of	equal	mass
placed	in	line	on	a	table	near	a	horseshoe	magnet,	h.	each	piece	of	iron	is	attracted	by	the
magnet	and	is	held	back	by	a	weight	to	which	itis	fastened	by	means	of	a	cord	running
overa	pulley,	pattheedgeofthetable.	these	weightsarealltobesupposedequally
heavy	and	each	of	them	pulls	upon	its	piece	of	iron	with	a	force	just	sufficient	to	balance
theattractionofthemagnetforthemiddlepiecenoitisclearthatunderthis
arrangement	no.	2	will	move	neither	to	the	right	nor	to	the	left,	since	the	forces	exerted
upon	it	by	the	magnet	and	the	weight	just	balance	each	other.	upon	no.	1,	howeverthe
magnet	pulls	harder	than	upon	no.	2,	because	it	is	nearer	and	its	pull	therefore	more	than
balances	the	force	exerted	by	the	weight,	so	that	no.	1	will	be	pulled	away	from	no.	2	and
will	stretch	the	elastic	cords,	which	are	represented	by	the	lines	joining	1	and	2,	until	their
tensiontogether	withthe	force	exerted	by	the	weightjust	balancesthe	attraction	ofthe
magnet.	for	no.	3,	the	force	exerted	by	the	magnet	is	less	than	that	of	the	weight,	and	it
willalsobepulledawayfrom	nountilitselasticcordsarestretchedtotheproper
tensionthenetresultisthatthethreeblockswhichwithoutthemagnet’sinfluence,
would	be	held	close	together	by	the	elastic	cords,	are	pulled	apart	by	this	outside	force	as
far	as	the	resistance	of	the	cords	will	permit.
fig.	23.—tide-raising	forces.
fig.	23.—tide-raising	forces.
an	entirely	analogous	set	of	forces	produces	a	similar	effect	upon	the	shape	of	the	moon.
the	elastic	cords	of	fig.	23	stand	for	the	attraction	of	gravitation	by	which	all	the	parts	of
the	moon	are	bound	together.	the	magnet	represents	the	earth	pulling	with	unequal	force
upon	differentpartsofthe	moon.	the	weightsaretheinertiaofthe	mooninitsorbital
motion	whichas	we	haveseeninaprevioussectionuponthe	wholejustbalancesthe
earth’s	attraction	and	keeps	the	moon	from	falling	into	it.	the	effect	of	these	forces	is	to
stretchoutthemoonalongalinepointingtowardtheearthjustastheblockswere
stretched	out	along	the	line	of	the	magnet,	and	to	make	this	diameter	of	the	moon	slightly
but	permanently	longer	than	the	others.
fig.	24.—the	tides.	fig.	24.—the	tides.
thetides.—similarlythemoonandthesunattractoppositesidesoftheearthwith
different	forces	and	feebly	tend	to	pull	it	out	of	shape.	but	here	a	new	element	comes	into
play:	the	earth	turns	so	rapidly	upon	its	axis	that	its	solid	parts	have	no	time	in	which	to
yield	sensibly	to	the	strains,	which	shift	rapidly	from	one	diameter	to	another	as	different
parts	of	the	earth	are	turned	toward	the	moon,	and	it	is	chiefly	the	waters	of	the	sea	which
respond	to	the	distorting	effect	of	the	sun’s	and	moon’s	attraction.	these	are	heaped	up	on
opposite	sides	of	the	earth	so	as	to	produce	a	slight	elongation	of	its	diameter,	and	fig.	24
shows	how	by	the	earth’s	rotation	this	swelling	of	the	waters	is	swept	out	from	under	the
moon	and	is	pulled	back	by	the	moon	until	it	finally	takes	up	some	such	position	as	that
shown	in	the	figure	where	the	effect	of	the	earth’s	rotation	in	carrying	it	one	way	is	just
balanced	by	the	moon’s	attraction	urging	it	back	on	line	with	the	moon.	this	heaping	up	of
the	waters	is	called	a	tide.	if	i	in	the	figure	represents	a	little	island	in	the	sea	the	waters
which	surround	it	will	of	course	accompany	it	in	its	diurnal	rotation	about	the	earth’s	axis,
but	whenever	the	island	comes	back	to	the	position	i,	the	waters	will	swell	up	as	a	part	of
the	tidal	wave	and	will	encroach	upon	the	land	in	what	is	called	high	tide	or	flood	tide.	so
too	whentheyreachihalfa	daylaterthey	willagainriseinfloodtideand	midway
between	these	points,	at	i’,	the	waters	must	subside,	giving	low	or	ebb	tide.
the	height	of	the	tide	raised	by	the	moon	in	the	open	sea	is	only	a	very	few	feet,	and	the
tide	raised	by	the	sun	is	even	less,	but	along	the	coast	of	a	continent,	in	bays	and	angles	of
the	shore,	it	often	happens	that	a	broad	but	low	tidal	wave	is	forced	into	a	narrow	corner,
andthentherise	ofthe	water	may	be	manyfeetespecially	whenthesolartide	andthe
lunar	tide	come	in	together,	as	they	do	twice	in	every	month,	at	new	and	full	moon.	why
do	they	come	together	at	these	times	instead	of	some	other?
small	as	arethesetidal	effectsitis	worth	noting	thatthey	may	in	certain	cases	be	very
much	greater—e.	gifthe	moon	were	as	massive	asisthe	sunitstidal	effect	would	be
some	millionsoftimesgreaterthanitnowisand	wouldsufficetogrindtheearthinto
fragments.	althoughtheearthescapesthisfatesome	other	bodiesare	notsofortunate,
and	we	shall	see	in	later	chapters	some	evidence	of	their	disintegration.
43.	the	scope	of	the	law	of	gravitation.—in	all	the	domain	of	physical	science	there	is
no	other	law	so	famous	as	the	newtonian	law	of	gravitation;	none	other	that	has	been	so
dwelt	upon,	studied,	and	elaborated	by	astronomers	and	mathematicians,	and	perhaps	none
that	can	be	considered	so	indisputably	proved.	over	and	over	again	mathematical	analysis,
based	upon	this	law,	has	pointed	out	conclusions	which,	though	hitherto	unsuspected,	have
afterward	been	found	true,	as	when	newton	himself	derived	as	a	corollary	from	this	law
that	the	earth	ought	to	be	flattened	at	the	poles—a	thing	not	known	at	that	time,	and	not
provedbyactualmeasurementuntillongafterwarditisinfactthiscapacityfor
predicting	the	unknown	and	for	explaining	in	minutest	detail	the	complicated	phenomena
of	the	heavens	and	the	earth	that	constitutes	the	real	proof	of	the	law	of	gravitation,	and	it
istherefore	worth	whiletonotethatatthepresenttimethereareaveryfewpointsat
which	the	law	fails	to	furnish	a	satisfactory	account	of	things	observed.	chief	among	these
isthecaseoftheplanetmercurythelongdiameterofwhoseorbitisslowlyturning
around	in	a	way	for	which	the	law	of	gravitation	as	yet	furnishes	no	explanation.	whether
this	is	because	the	law	itself	is	inaccurate	or	incomplete,	or	whether	it	only	marks	a	case	in
which	astronomers	have	not	yet	properly	applied	the	law	and	traced	out	its	consequences,
we	do	not	know;	but	whether	it	be	the	one	or	the	other,	this	and	other	similar	cases	show
that	even	here,	in	its	most	perfect	chapter,	astronomy	still	remains	an	incomplete	science.

chapter	v
the	earth	as	a	planet
44.	thesizeoftheearth.—thestudentispresumedtohavelearnedinhisstudyof
geography,	that	the	earth	is	a	globe	about	8,000	miles	in	diameter	and,	without	dwelling
upon	the	“proofs”	which	are	commonly	given	for	these	statements,	we	proceed	to	consider
the	principles	upon	which	the	measurement	of	the	earth’s	size	and	shape	are	based.
fig.	25.—measuring	the	size	of	the	earth.	fig.	25.—measuring	the	size	of	the	earth.
in	fig.	25	the	circle	represents	a	meridian	section	of	the	earth;	p	p’	is	the	axis	about	which
it	rotates,	and	the	dotted	lines	represent	a	beam	of	light	coming	from	a	star	in	the	plane	of
the	meridian,	and	so	distant	that	the	dotted	lines	are	all	practically	parallel	to	each	other.
the	several	radii	drawn	through	the	points	1,	2,	3,	represent	the	direction	of	the	vertical	at
these	points,	and	the	angles	which	these	radii	produced,	make	with	the	rays	of	starlight	are
each	equal	to	the	angular	distance	of	the	star	from	the	zenith	of	the	place	at	the	moment
the	star	crosses	the	meridian.	we	have	already	seen,	in	chapter	ii,	how	these	angles	may
be	measuredanditisapparentfromthefigurethatthedifferencebetweenanytwoof
these	angles—e.	g.,	the	angles	at	1	and	2—is	equal	to	the	angle	at	the	center,	o,	between
the	points	1	and	2.	by	measuring	these	angular	distances	of	the	star	from	the	zeniththe
astronomer	finds	the	angles	at	the	center	of	the	earth	between	the	stations	1,	2,	3,	etc.,	at
which	his	observations	are	made.	if	the	meridian	were	a	perfect	circle	the	change	of	zenith
distance	of	the	star,	as	one	traveled	along	a	meridian	from	the	equator	to	the	pole,	would
be	perfectly	uniform—the	same	number	of	degrees	for	each	hundred	miles	traveled—and
observations	made	in	many	parts	of	the	earth	show	that	this	is	very	nearly	true,	but	that,	on
the	whole,	as	we	approach	the	pole	it	is	necessary	to	travel	a	little	greater	distance	than	is
required	for	a	given	change	in	the	angle	at	the	equator.	the	earth	is,	in	fact,	flattened	at	the
poles	to	the	amount	of	about	27	miles	in	the	length	of	its	diameter,	and	by	this	amount,	as
well	as	by	smaller	variations	due	to	mountains	and	valleys,	the	shape	of	the	earth	differs
from	a	perfectsphere.	theseastronomical	measurementsofthecurvatureoftheearth’s
surfacefurnish	byfarthe	mostsatisfactory	proofthatitis	very	approximately	asphere,
and	furnish	as	its	equatorial	diameter	7,926	miles.
neglectingthecompressionasitiscallediethe27	milesbywhichtheequatorial
diameterexceedsthepolarthesizeoftheearth	mayeasilybefound	by	measuringthe
distancealongthesurfaceandbycombining	withthistheangle1	oobtained
through	measuring	the	meridian	altitudes	of	any	star	as	seen	from	1	and	2.	draw	on	paper
an	angle	equal	to	the	measured	difference	of	altitude	and	find	how	far	you	must	go	from
itsvertexinordertohavethedistancebetweenthesides,	measuredalonganarcofa
circle,	equal	to	the	measured	distance	between	1	and	2.	this	distance	from	the	vertex	will
be	the	earth’s	radius.
exercise	19.—measure	the	diameter	of	the	earth	by	the	method	given	above.	in	order	that
this	may	be	done	satisfactorily,	the	two	stations	at	which	observations	are	made	must	be
separatedbyaconsiderabledistance—iemilestheyneednotbeonthesame
meridianbutiftheyareondifferent	meridiansinplaceoftheactualdistancebetween
them,	there	must	be	used	the	projection	of	that	distance	upon	the	meridian—i.	e.,	the	north
and	south	part	of	the	distance.
by	co-operation	between	schools	in	the	northern	and	southern	states,	using	a	good	map
toobtaintherequireddistancesthediameteroftheearthmaybemeasuredwiththe
plumb-line	apparatus	described	in	chapter	ii	and	determined	within	a	small	percentage	of
its	true	value.
45.	the	mass	of	the	earth.—we	have	seen	in	chapter	ivthe	possibility	of	determining
themassesoftheplanetsasfractionalpartsofthesun’smassbutnothingwasthere
shownorcouldbeshownabout	measuringthese	massesafterthecommonfashionin
kilogrammesortonstodothiswemustfirstgetthemassoftheearthintonsor
kilogrammes,	and	while	the	principles	involved	in	this	determination	are	simple	enough,
their	actual	application	is	delicate	and	difficult.
fig.	26.—illustrating	the	principles	involved	in	weighing	the	earth.	fig.	26.—
illustrating	the	principles	involved	in	weighing	the	earth.
in	fig.	26	we	suppose	along	plumb	lineto	be	suspended	abovethe	surface	ofthe	earth
andtobeattractedtowardthecenteroftheearthcbyaforcewhoseintensityis
(chapter	iv)
f	=	k	me/r2,
where	e	denotes	the	mass	of	the	earth,	which	is	to	be	determined	by	experiment,	and	r	is
the	radius	of	the	earth,	3,963	miles.	if	there	is	no	disturbing	influence	present,	the	plumb
line	will	point	directly	downward,	but	if	a	massive	ball	of	lead	or	other	heavy	substance	is
placed	at	one	side,	1,	it	will	attract	the	plumb	line	with	a	force	equal	to
f	=	k	mb/r2,
where	r	is	the	distance	of	its	center	from	the	plumb	bob	and	b	is	its	mass	which	we	may
suppose,	for	illustration,	to	be	a	ton.	in	consequence	of	this	attraction	the	plumb	line	will
bepulledalittletoonesideasshown	bythedottedlineandif	werepresentbylthe
lengthoftheplumblineandbydthedistancebetweentheoriginalandthedisturbed
positions	of	the	plumb	bob	we	may	write	the	proportion
f	:	f	::	l	:	d;
and	introducing	the	values	of	f	and	f	given	above,	and	solving	for	ethe	proportion	thus
transformed,	we	find
e	=	b	·	l/d	·	(r/r)2.
inthisequationthemassoftheballbthelengthoftheplumblinelthedistance
betweenthe	center	ofthe	ballandthe	center	ofthe	plumb	bob,	randtheradius	ofthe
earth,	r,	can	all	be	measured	directly,	and	d,	the	amount	by	which	the	plumb	bob	is	pulled
to	one	side	by	the	ball,	is	readily	found	by	shifting	the	ball	over	to	the	other	side,	at	2,	and
measuring	with	a	microscope	how	far	the	plumb	bob	moves.	this	distance	will,	of	course,
be	equal	to	2	d.
by	methods	involving	these	principles,	but	applied	in	a	manner	more	complicated	as	well
as	more	precisethe	mass	ofthe	earth	is	found	to	beintons,	6,642	×	1018—i.	e.,	6,642
followed	by	18	ciphers,	or	in	kilogrammes	60,258	×	1020.	the	earth’s	atmosphere	makes
up	about	a	millionth	part	of	this	mass.
if	the	length	of	the	plumb	line	were	100	feet,	the	weight	of	the	ball	a	ton,	and	the	distance
betweenthetwo	positions	ofthe	ball,	1	andsixfeet,	how	manyinches,	d,	wouldthe
plumb	bob	be	pulled	out	of	place?
find	from	the	mass	of	the	earth	and	the	data	of	§	40	the	mass	of	the	sun	in	tons.	find	also
the	mass	of	mars.	the	computation	can	be	very	greatly	abridged	by	the	use	of	logarithms.
46.	precession.—that	the	earth	is	isolated	in	space	and	has	no	support	upon	which	to	rest,
issufficientlyshown	bythefactthatthestarsarevisibleuponeverysideofitandno
support	can	be	seen	stretching	out	toward	them.	we	must	then	consider	the	earth	to	be	a
globe	traveling	freely	aboutthe	sun	in	a	circuit	which	it	completes	once	every	year,	and
rotatingonceineverytwenty-fourhoursaboutanaxiswhichremainsatallseasons
directed	very	nearly	toward	the	star	polaris.	the	student	should	be	able	to	show	from	his
own	observations	of	the	sun	that,	with	reference	to	the	stars,	the	direction	of	the	sun	from
the	earth	changes	about	a	degree	a	day.	does	this	prove	that	the	earth	revolves	about	the
sun?
but	itis	only	in	appearance	thatthe	pole	maintains	its	fixed	position	among	the	stars.	if
photographs	are	taken	year	after	year,	after	the	manner	of	exercise	7,	it	will	be	found	that
slowly	the	pole	is	moving	(nearly)	toward	polaris,	and	making	this	star	describe	a	smaller
andsmallercircleinitsdiurnalpath,	whilestarsontheothersideofthepole(inright
ascension	12hbecome	more	distantfromitand	describelargercirclesintheirdiurnal
motion;	but	the	process	takes	place	so	slowly	that	the	space	of	a	lifetime	is	required	for	the
motion	of	the	pole	to	equal	the	angular	diameter	of	the	full	moon.
spin	atop	and	note	howitsrapid	whirl	aboutits	axis	correspondstothe	earth’s	diurnal
rotation.	when	the	axis	about	which	the	top	spins	is	truly	vertical	the	top	“sleeps”;	but	if
the	axisistipped	ever	solittle	away	from	the	verticalit	beginsto	wobble,	sothatif	we
imaginethe	axis	prolonged	outtothe	sky	and	provided	with	a	pencil	point	as	a	marker,
this	would	trace	a	circle	around	the	zenith,	along	which	the	pole	of	the	top	would	move,
andalittleobservation	willshowthatthe	morethetopistippedfromtheverticalthe
larger	does	this	circle	become	and	the	more	rapidly	does	the	wobbling	take	place.	were	it
not	for	the	spinning	of	the	top	about	its	axis,	it	would	promptly	fall	over	when	tipped	from
the	vertical	position,	butthespin	combines	withtheforce	which	pullsthetop	overand
producesthe	wobbling	motionspinthetopinoppositedirections,	withthehandsofa
watch	and	contrary	to	the	hands	of	a	watch,	and	note	the	effect	which	is	produced	upon	the
wobbling.
the	earth	presents	many	points	of	resemblance	to	the	top.	its	diurnal	rotation	is	the	spin
about	the	axis.	this	axis	is	tipped	23.5°	away	from	the	perpendicular	to	its	orbit	(obliquity
oftheeclipticjustastheaxisofthetopistippedawayfromtheverticallinein
consequence	of	its	rapid	spin,	the	body	of	the	earth	bulges	out	at	the	equator	(27	miles),
andthesunandmoonbyvirtueoftheirattraction(seechapterivlayholdofthis
protuberance	and	pull	it	down	toward	the	plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit,	so	that	if	it	were	not
forthespinthisforce	wouldstraightentheaxisupandsetitperpendiculartothe	orbit
plane.	but	here,	as	in	the	case	of	the	top,	the	spin	and	the	tipping	force	combine	to	produce
awobblewhichiscalledprecessionandwhoseeffectwerecognizeintheshifting
position	of	the	pole	among	the	stars.	the	motion	of	precession	is	very	much	slower	than
the	wobbling	of	the	top,	since	the	tipping	force	for	the	earth	is	relatively	very	small,	and	a
period	of	nearly	26,000	years	is	required	for	a	complete	circuit	of	the	pole	about	its	center
ofmotionfrictionultimatelystopsboththespinandthewobbleofthetopbutthis
influence	seems	wholly	absent	in	the	case	of	the	earth,	and	both	rotation	and	precession	go
onunchangedfromcenturytocenturysaveforcertain	minorforceswhichforatime
changethedirectionorrateoftheprecessionalmotionfirstinonewayandthenin
another,	without	in	the	long	run	producing	any	results	of	consequence.
thecenterof	motionabout	whichthepoletravelsinasmallcirclehavinganangular
radius	of	23.5°,	is	at	that	point	of	the	heavens	toward	which	a	perpendicular	to	the	plane	of
the	earth’s	orbit	points,	and	may	be	found	on	the	star	map	in	right	ascension	18h.	0m.	and
declination	66.5°.
exercise	20.—find	this	point	on	the	map,	and	draw	as	well	as	you	can	the	path	of	the	pole
about	it.	the	motion	of	the	pole	along	its	path	is	toward	the	constellation	cepheus.	mark
thepositionofthepolealongthispathatintervalsofyearsandrefertothese
positions	in	dealing	with	some	of	the	following	questions:
does	the	wobbling	of	the	top	occur	in	the	same	direction	as	the	motion	of	precession?	do
the	tipping	forces	applied	to	the	earth	and	top	act	in	the	same	direction?	what	will	be	the
polar	star	12,000	years	hence?	the	great	pyramid	of	egypt	is	thought	to	have	been	used
as	an	observatory	when	alpha	draconis	was	the	bright	star	nearest	the	pole.	how	long	ago
was	that?
the	motion	ofthe	pole	of	course	carriesthe	equator	and	the	equinoxes	with	it,	and	thus
slowly	changes	the	right	ascensions	and	declinations	of	all	the	stars.	on	this	account	it	is
frequentlycalledtheprecession	oftheequinoxesandthis	motion	oftheequinoxslow
thoughitisisamatterofsomeconsequenceinconnectionwithchronologyandthe
length	of	the	year.
will	the	precession	ever	bring	back	the	right	ascensions	and	declinations	to	be	again	what
they	now	are?
in	what	direction	is	the	pole	moving	with	respect	to	the	big	dipper?	will	its	motion	ever
bring	it	exactly	to	polaris?	how	far	away	from	polaris	will	the	precession	carry	the	pole?
what	other	bright	stars	will	be	brought	near	the	pole	by	the	precession?
47.	the	warmingoftheearth.—winterandsummeralikethedayisontheaverage
warmer	than	the	night,	and	it	is	easy	to	see	that	this	surplus	of	heat	comes	from	the	sun	by
day	and	is	lost	by	night	through	radiation	into	the	void	which	surrounds	the	earth;	just	as
the	heat	contained	in	a	mass	of	molten	iron	is	radiated	away	and	the	iron	cooled	when	it	is
taken	out	from	the	furnace	and	placed	amid	colder	surroundings.	the	earth’s	loss	of	heat
by	radiation	goes	on	ceaselessly	day	and	night,	and	were	it	not	for	the	influx	of	solar	heat
this	radiation	would	steadily	diminish	the	temperature	toward	what	is	called	the	“absolute
zero”—i.	e.,	a	state	in	which	all	heat	has	been	taken	away	and	beyond	which	there	can	be
no	greater	degree	of	cold.	this	must	not	be	confounded	with	the	zero	temperatures	shown
byourthermometerssinceitliesnearlybelowthezeroofthefahrenheitscale
(-273°	centigrade),	a	temperature	which	by	comparison	makes	the	coldest	winter	weather
seem	warm,	although	the	ordinary	thermometer	may	register	many	degrees	below	its	zero.
theheatradiatedbythesunintothesurroundingspaceoneverysideofitisanother
example	ofthesamecooling	processahotbody	giving	upitsheattothecolderspace
about	it,	and	it	is	the	minute	fraction	of	this	heat	poured	out	by	the	sun,	and	in	small	part
interceptedbytheearthwhichwarmsthelatterandproduceswhatwecallweather,
climate,	the	seasons,	etc.
observe	the	fluctuations,	the	ebb	and	flow,	which	are	inherent	in	this	process.	from	sunset
to	sunrise	there	is	nothing	to	compensate	the	steady	outflow	of	heat,	and	air	and	ground
grow	steadily	colder,	but	with	the	sunrise	there	comes	an	influx	of	solar	heat,	feeble	at	first
because	it	strikes	the	earth’s	surface	very	obliquely,	but	becoming	more	and	more	efficient
asthesunrises	higherinthesky.	butastheairandthe	ground	grow	warm	duringthe
morning	hours	they	part	more	and	more	readily	and	rapidly	with	their	store	of	heat,	just	as
asteam	pipe	or	a	cup	of	coffeeradiates	heat	morerapidly	when	very	hot.	the	warmest
hour	of	the	day	is	reached	when	these	opposing	tendencies	of	income	and	expenditure	of
heat	are	just	balanced;	and	barring	such	disturbing	factors	as	wind	and	clouds,	the	gain	in
temperatureusuallyextendstothetime—anhourortwobeyondnoon—atwhichthe
diminishingaltitudeofthesunrendershisrayslessefficientwhenradiationgainsthe
upper	hand	and	the	temperature	becomes	for	a	short	time	stationary,	and	then	commences
to	fall	steadily	until	the	next	sunrise.
we	have	here	an	example	of	what	is	called	a	periodic	change—i.	e.,	one	which,	within	a
definiteanduniformperiodhoursoscillatesfromaminimumuptoamaximum
temperature	and	then	back	again	to	a	minimum,	repeating	substantially	the	same	variation
day	after	day.	but	it	must	be	understood	that	minor	causes	not	taken	into	account	above,
such	as	winds,	water,	etc.,	produce	otherfluctuationsfrom	dayto	day	which	sometimes
obscure	or	even	obliterate	the	diurnal	variation	of	temperature	caused	by	the	sun.
exposethebackofyourhandtothesunholdingthehandinsuchapositionthatthe
sunlightstrikesperpendicularlyuponitthenturnthehandsothatthelightfallsquite
obliquely	upon	it	and	note	how	much	more	vigorous	isthe	warming	effect	of	the	sun	in
thefirst	positionthanintheseconditis	chieflythis	difference	of	anglethat	makesthe
sun’swarmthmoreeffectivewhenheishighupintheskythanwhenheisnearthe
horizon,	and	more	effective	in	summer	than	in	winter.
we	have	seen	in	chapter	iii	that	the	sun’s	motion	among	the	stars	takes	place	along	a	path
which	carries	it	alternately	north	and	south	of	the	equator	to	a	distance	of	23.5°,	and	the
stars	show	by	their	earlier	risings	and	later	settings,	as	we	pass	from	the	equatortoward
the	north	pole	of	the	heavens,	that	as	the	sun	moves	northward	from	the	equator,	each	day
in	the	northern	hemisphere	will	become	a	little	longer,	each	night	a	little	shorter,	and	every
day	the	sun	will	rise	higher	toward	the	zenith	until	this	process	culminates	toward	the	end
ofjunewhenthesunbeginstomovesouthwardbringingshorterdaysandsmaller
altitudesuntilthechristmasseasonwhenagainitisreversedandthesunmoves
northward.	we	have	here	another	periodic	variation,	which	runs	its	complete	course	in	a
period	of	a	year,	and	it	is	easy	to	see	that	this	variation	must	have	a	marked	effect	on	the
warming	of	the	earth,	the	long	days	and	great	altitudes	of	summer	producing	the	greater
warmthofthatseasonwhiletheshorterdaysandloweraltitudesofdecemberby
diminishing	the	daily	supply	of	solar	heat,	bring	on	the	winter’s	cold.	the	succession	of
theseasonswinterfollowingsummerandsummerwinteriscausedbythevarying
altitude	ofthe	sun,	and	thisinturn	is	due	tothe	obliquity	ofthe	ecliptic,	or,	whatisthe
same	thing,	the	amount	by	which	the	axis	of	the	earth	is	tipped	from	being	perpendicular
to	the	plane	of	its	orbit,	and	the	seasons	are	simply	a	periodic	change	in	the	warming	of
the	earth,	quite	comparable	with	the	diurnal	change	but	of	longer	period.
itisevidentthattheperiodwithinwhichthesuccessionofwinterandsummeris
completed,	the	year,	as	we	commonly	call	it,	must	equal	the	time	required	by	the	sun	to	go
fromthevernalequinoxaroundtothevernalequinoxagainsincethisfurnishesa
complete	cycle	of	the	sun’s	motions	north	and	south	from	the	equator.	on	account	of	the
westwardmotionoftheequinox(precessionthisisnotquitethesameasthetime
requiredforacompleterevolutionoftheearthinitsorbitbutisalittleshorter(20m.
23s.),	since	the	equinox	moves	back	to	meet	the	sun.
48.	relationofthesuntoclimate.—itisclearthatboththenorthernandsouthern
hemispheresoftheearthmusthavesubstantiallythesamekindofseasonssincethe
motionofthesunnorthandsouthaffectsbothalikebut	whenthesunisnorthofthe
equator	and	warming	our	hemisphere	most	effectively,	his	light	falls	more	obliquely	upon
theotherhemispherethedaysthereareshortandwinterreignsatthetimeweare
enjoying	summer,	while	six	months	later	the	conditions	are	reversed.
inthosepartsoftheearthneartheequator—thetorridzone—thereisnosuch	marked
changefromcoldto	warmas	weexperiencebecauseasthesunnevergets	morethanawayfromthecelestialequatoroneverydayoftheyearhe	mountshighinthe
tropic	skies,	always	coming	within	23.5°	of	the	zenith,	and	usually	closer	than	this,	so	that
there	is	no	such	periodic	change	in	the	heat	supply	asis	experienced	in	higher	latitudes,
and	within	the	tropics	the	temperature	is	therefore	both	higher	and	more	uniform	than	in
our	latitude.
inthefrigid	zones,	onthe	contrarythesun	neverrises	highinthe	sky;	atthe	poles	his
greatest	altitude	is	only	23.5°,	and	during	the	winter	season	he	does	not	rise	at	all,	so	that
the	temperature	is	here	low	the	whole	year	round,	and	during	the	winter	season,	when	for
weeks	or	months	at	a	time	the	supply	of	solar	light	is	entirely	cut	off,	the	temperature	falls
to	a	degree	unknown	in	more	favored	climes.
if	the	obliquity	of	the	ecliptic	were	made	10°	greater,	what	would	be	the	effect	upon	the
seasons	in	the	temperate	zones?	what	if	it	were	made	10°	less?
does	the	precession	of	the	equinoxes	have	any	effect	upon	the	seasons	or	upon	the	climate
of	different	parts	of	the	earth?
ifthe	axis	ofthe	earth	pointed	toward	arcturus	instead	of	polaris,	would	the	seasons	be
any	different	from	what	they	are	now?
49.	the	atmosphere.—although	welive	uponitssurface,	we	are	not	outsidethe	earth,
but	at	the	bottom	of	a	sea	of	air	which	forms	the	earth’s	outermost	layer	and	extends	above
ourheadstoaheightofmanymilesthestudyofmostofthephenomenaofthe
atmospherebelongstothatbranchofphysicscalledmeteorologybutthereareafew
matters	which	fairly	come	within	our	consideration	of	the	earth	as	a	planet.	we	can	not	see
the	stars	save	as	we	look	through	this	atmosphere,	and	the	light	which	comes	through	it	is
bent	and	oftentimes	distorted	so	as	to	present	serious	obstacles	to	any	accurate	telescopic
study	of	the	heavenly	bodies.	frequently	this	disturbance	is	visible	to	the	naked	eye,	and
thestarsaresaidtotwinkle—ietoquiverandchangecolor	manytimespersecond,
solely	in	consequence	of	a	disturbed	condition	of	the	air	and	not	from	anything	which	goes
on	in	the	star.	this	effect	is	more	marked	low	down	in	the	sky	than	near	the	zenith,	and	it
is	worth	notingthatthe	planetsshow	verylittleofitbecausethelighttheysendtothe
earth	comes	from	a	disk	of	sensible	area,	while	a	star,	being	much	smaller	and	farther	from
theearthhasitsdiskreducedpracticallytoamerepointwhoselightismoreeasily
affected	bylocal	disturbancesinthe	atmospherethanisthe	broader	beam	which	comes
from	the	planets’	disk.
50.	refraction.—at	alltimes,	whetherthestarstwinkle	or	nottheirlightis	bentinits
passage	through	the	atmosphere,	so	that	the	stars	appear	to	stand	higher	up	in	the	sky	than
their	true	positions.	this	effect,	which	the	astronomer	calls	refraction,	must	be	allowed	for
in	observations	ofthe	more	precise	classalthough	save	atlow	altitudesitsamountisa
very	small	fraction	of	a	degree,	but	near	the	horizon	it	is	much	exaggerated	in	amount	and
becomes	easily	visible	to	the	naked	eye	by	distorting	the	disks	of	the	sun	and	moon	from
circles	into	ovals	with	their	long	diameters	horizontal.	the	refraction	lifts	both	upper	and
lower	edge	ofthe	sun,	butliftsthelower	edge	morethanthe	upperthus	shorteningthe
vertical	diameter.	see	fig.	27,	which	shows	not	only	this	effect,	but	also	the	reflection	of
the	sun	from	the	curved	surface	of	the	sea,	still	further	flattening	the	image.	if	the	surface
of	the	water	were	flatthe	reflected	image	would	have	the	same	shape	as	the	sun’s	disk,
and	its	altered	appearance	is	sometimes	cited	as	a	proof	that	the	earth’s	surface	is	curved.
thetotal	amount	oftherefraction	atthe	horizonis	alittle	morethan	half	a	degree,	and
since	the	diameters	of	the	sun	and	moon	subtend	an	angle	of	about	half	a	degree,	we	have
theremarkableresultthatinrealitythe	wholediskofeithersunor	moonisbelowthe
horizonattheinstantthattheloweredgeappearstotouchthehorizonandsunsetor
moonset	begins.	the	same	effect	exists	at	sunrise,	and	as	a	consequencethe	duration	of
sunshineorof	moonshineisontheaverageaboutsix	minuteslongereachdaythanit
would	be	if	there	were	no	atmosphere	and	no	refraction.	a	partial	offset	to	this	benefit	is
found	in	the	fact	that	the	atmosphere	absorbs	the	light	of	the	heavenly	bodies,	so	that	stars
appear	much	less	bright	when	nearthe	horizon	than	when	they	are	higher	up	in	the	sky,
andbyreasonofthisabsorptionthesettingsuncanbelookedatwiththenakedeye
without	the	discomfort	which	its	dazzling	luster	causes	at	noon.
fig.	27.—flattening	of	the	sun’s	disk	by	refraction	and	by	reflection	from	the	surface	of
the	sea.
fig.	27.—flattening	of	the	sun’s	disk	by	refraction	and	by	reflection	from	the	surface
of	the	seathetwilight.—anothereffectoftheatmosphereevenmoremarkedthanthe
precedingisthe	twilight.	as	at	sunrise	the	mountain	top	catches	the	rays	of	the	coming
sun	before	they	reach	the	lowland,	and	at	sunset	it	keeps	them	after	they	have	faded	from
theregionsbelowsotheparticlesofdustandvaporwhichalwaysfloatinthe
atmosphere,	catch	the	sunlight	and	reflect	it	to	the	surface	of	the	earth	while	the	sun	is	still
belowthehorizongivingatthebeginningandendofdaythatvagueanddiffuselight
which	we	call	twilight.
fig.	28.—twilight	phenomena.	fig.	28.—twilight	phenomena.
fig.	28	shows	a	part	ofthe	earth	surrounded	by	such	a	dust-laden	atmosphere,	whichis
illuminated	on	the	left	by	the	rays	of	the	sun,	but	which,	on	the	right	of	the	figure,	lies	in
the	shadow	cast	by	the	earth.	to	an	observer	placed	at	1	the	sun	is	just	setting,	and	all	the
atmosphere	above	him	is	illumined	with	its	rays,	which	furnish	a	bright	twilight.	when,	by
theearth’srotationthisobserver	has	beencarriedtoalltheregiontotheeastofhis
zenith	lies	in	the	shadow,	while	to	the	west	there	is	a	part	of	the	atmosphere	from	which
therestillcomesatwilightbutnowcomparativelyfaintbecausethelowerpartofthe
atmosphere	about	our	observer	lies	in	the	shadow,	and	it	is	mainly	its	upper	regions	from
which	the	light	comes,	and	here	the	dust	and	moisture	are	much	less	abundant	than	in	the
lower	strata.	stilllater,	when	the	observer	has	been	carried	by	the	earth’s	rotation	tothe
pointeveryvestigeoftwilightwillhavevanishedfromhisskybecauseallofthe
illuminated	part	of	the	atmosphere	is	now	below	his	horizon,	which	is	represented	by	the
line	3	l.	in	the	figure	the	sun	is	represented	to	be	78°	below	this	horizon	line	at	the	end	of
twilight,	but	this	is	a	gross	exaggeration,	made	for	the	sake	of	clearness	in	the	drawing—in
fact,	twilight	is	usually	said	to	end	when	the	sun	is	18°	below	the	horizon.
let	the	student	redraw	fig.	28	on	a	large	scale,	so	that	the	points	1	and	3	shall	be	only	18°
apart,	as	seen	from	the	earth’s	center.	he	will	find	that	the	point	l	is	brought	down	much
closer	to	the	surface	of	the	earth,	and	measuring	the	length	of	the	line	2	l,	he	should	find
for	the	“height	of	the	atmosphere”	about	one-eightieth	part	of	the	radius	of	the	earth—i.	e.,
a	little	less	than	50	miles.	this,	however,	is	not	the	true	height	of	the	atmosphere.	the	air
extends	far	beyond	this,	but	the	particles	of	dust	and	vapor	which	are	capable	of	sending
sunlight	down	to	the	earth	seem	all	to	lie	below	this	limit.
the	student	should	not	fail	to	watch	the	eastern	sky	after	sunset,	and	see	the	shadow	of	the
earth	rise	up	and	fill	it	while	the	twilight	arch	retreats	steadily	toward	the	west.
fig.	29.—the	cause	of	long	and	short	twilights.
fig.	29.—the	cause	of	long	and	short	twilights.
duration	oftwilight.—sincetwilightends	whenthesunisbelowthehorizonany
circumstance	which	makes	the	sun	go	down	rapidly	will	shorten	the	duration	of	twilight,
and	anything	which	retards	the	downward	motion	of	the	sun	will	correspondingly	prolong
it.	chief	among	influences	of	this	kind	is	the	angle	which	the	sun’s	course	makes	with	the
horizon.	if	it	goes	straight	down,	as	at	a,	fig.	29,	a	much	shorter	time	will	suffice	to	carry
it	to	a	depression	of	18°	than	is	needed	in	the	case	shown	at	bin	the	same	figure,	where
the	motion	is	very	oblique	to	the	horizon.	if	we	consider	different	latitudes	and	different
seasons	of	the	year,	we	shall	find	every	possible	variety	of	circumstance	from	a	to	b,	and
correspondingtothesethedurationoftwilightvariesfromanall-nightdurationinthe
summers	of	scotland	and	more	northern	lands	to	an	hour	or	less	in	the	mountains	of	peru.
for	the	sake	of	graphical	effect,	the	shortness	of	tropical	twilight	is	somewhat	exaggerated
by	coleridge	in	the	lines,
“the	sun’s	rim	dips;	the	stars	rush	out:
at	one	stride	comes	the	dark.”
the	ancient
mariner.
in	the	united	states	the	longest	twilights	come	at	the	end	of	june,	and	last	for	a	little	more
than	two	hours,	while	the	shortest	ones	are	in	march	and	september,	amounting	to	a	little
more	than	an	hour	and	a	half;	but	at	all	times	the	last	half	hour	of	twilight	is	hardly	to	be
distinguished	from	night,	so	small	is	the	quantity	of	reflecting	matter	in	the	upper	regions
of	the	atmosphere.	for	practical	convenience	it	is	customary	to	assume	in	the	courts	of	law
that	twilight	ends	an	hour	after	sunset.
how	long	does	twilight	last	at	the	north	pole?
the	aurora.—one	other	phenomenon	of	the	atmosphere	may	be	mentioned,	only	to	point
out	that	it	is	not	of	an	astronomical	character.	the	aurora,	or	northern	lights,	is	as	purely
an	affair	ofthe	earth	asisathunderstorm,	anditsexplanation	belongstothesubject	of
terrestrial	magnetism.

chapter	vi
the	measurement	of	time
52.	solar	time.—to	measure	any	quantity	we	need	a	unitinterms	of	whichit	must	be
expressedanglesaremeasuredindegreesandthedegreeistheunitforangular
measurementformostscientificpurposesthecentimeterisadoptedastheunitwith
whichtomeasuredistancesandsimilarlyadayisthefundamentalunitforthe
measurement	of	time.	hours,	minutes,	and	seconds	are	aliquot	parts	of	this	unit	convenient
for	use	in	dealing	with	shorter	periods	than	a	day,	and	the	week,	month,	and	year	which
we	use	in	our	calendars	are	multiples	of	the	day.
strictly	speaking,	a	day	is	not	the	time	required	by	the	earth	to	make	one	revolution	upon
its	axis,	but	it	is	best	defined	as	the	amount	of	time	required	for	a	particular	part	of	the	sky
to	make	the	complete	circuit	from	the	meridian	of	a	particular	place	through	west	and	east
back	to	the	meridian	again.	the	day	begins	at	the	moment	when	this	specified	part	of	the
sky	is	on	the	meridian,	and	“the	time”	at	any	moment	is	the	hour	angle	of	this	particular
part	of	the	sky—i.	e.,	the	number	of	hours,	minutes,	etc.,	that	have	elapsed	since	it	was	on
the	meridian.
thestudenthasalreadybecomefamiliar	withthekindofday	whichisbaseduponthe
motionofthevernalequinoxandwhichfurnishessiderealtimeandhehasseenthat
sidereal	time,	while	very	convenient	in	dealing	with	the	motions	of	the	stars,	is	decidedly
inconvenient	for	the	ordinary	affairs	of	life	since	in	the	reckoning	of	the	hours	it	takes	no
accountofdaylightanddarkness.	onecannottelloff-hand	whetherhourssidereal
time,	falls	in	the	day	or	in	the	night.	we	must	in	some	way	obtain	a	day	and	a	system	of
timereckoningbasedupontheapparentdiurnal	motionofthesunand	we	mayif	we
choose,	take	the	sun	itself	as	the	point	in	the	heavens	whose	transit	over	the	meridian	shall
markthebeginningandtheendofthedayinthissystem“thetimeisthenumberof
hours,	minutes,	etc.,	which	have	elapsed	since	the	sun	was	on	the	meridian,	and	this	is	the
kind	of	time	which	is	shown	by	a	sun	dial,	and	which	was	in	general	use,	years	ago,	before
clocks	and	watches	became	common.	since	the	sun	moves	among	the	stars	about	a	degree
per	day,	itis	easily	seen	that	the	rotating	earth	will	have	to	turn	farther	in	order	to	carry
any	particular	meridian	from	the	sun	around	to	the	sun	again,	than	to	carry	it	from	a	star
around	tothe	same	star,	orfrom	the	vernal	equinox	around	tothe	vernal	equinox	again;
just	as	the	minute	hand	of	a	clock	turns	farther	in	going	from	the	hour	hand	round	to	the
hour	hand	againthanitturnsin	goingfrom	xiito	xii.	these	solar	days	and	hours	and
minutesarethereforealittlelongerthanthecorrespondingsiderealonesandthis
furnishes	the	explanation	why	the	stars	come	to	the	meridian	a	little	earlier,	by	solar	time,
every	night	than	on	the	night	before,	and	why	sidereal	time	gains	steadily	upon	solar	time,
thisgainamountingtoapproximately3m56.5sperdayorexactlyonedayperyear,
since	the	sun	makes	the	complete	circuit	of	the	constellations	once	in	a	year.
with	the	general	introduction	of	clocks	and	watches	into	use	about	a	century	ago	this	kind
of	solar	time	went	out	of	common	use,	since	no	well-regulated	clock	could	keep	the	time
correctly.	the	earthinits	orbital	motion	aroundthesun	goesfasterinsome	parts	ofits
orbit	than	in	others,	and	in	consequence	the	sun	appears	to	move	more	rapidly	among	the
stars	in	winter	than	in	summer;	moreover,	on	account	of	the	convergence	of	hour	circles	as
wegoawayfromtheequatorthesameamountof	motionalongtheeclipticproduces
more	effect	in	winter	and	summer	when	the	sun	is	north	or	south,	than	it	does	in	the	spring
and	autumn	when	the	sun	is	near	the	equator,	and	as	a	combined	result	of	these	causes	and
other	minor	ones	true	solar	time,	as	it	is	called,	is	itself	not	uniform,	but	falls	behind	the
uniform	lapse	of	sidereal	time	at	a	variable	rate,	sometimes	quicker,	sometimes	slower.	a
true	solar	day,	from	noon	to	noon,	is	51	seconds	shorter	in	september	than	in	december.
fig.	30.—the	equation	of	time.
fig.	30.—the	equation	of	time.
53.	meansolartime.—toremedytheseinconveniencestherehasbeeninventedand
brought	into	common	use	what	is	called	mean	solar	time,	which	is	perfectly	uniform	in	its
lapse	and	which,	by	comparison	with	sidereal	time,	loses	exactly	one	day	per	year.	“the
time”	in	this	system	never	differs	much	from	true	solar	time,	and	the	difference	between
the	two	for	any	particular	day	may	be	found	in	any	good	almanac,	or	may	be	read	from	the
curvein	figin	whichthepartofthecurveabovetheline	marked0mshowshow
many	minutes	meansolartimeisfasterthantruesolartime.	thecorrectnameforthis
difference	between	the	two	kinds	of	solar	time	is	the	equation	of	time,	but	in	the	almanacs
itis	frequently	marked	“sun	fast”	or	“sun	slow.”	in	siderealtime	and	true	solartime	the
distinction	between	a.	m.	hours(ante	meridiembeforethesunreachesthe	meridian)
and	p.	m.	hours	(post	meridiem	=	after	the	sun	has	passed	the	meridian)	is	not	observed,
“the	time”	being	counted	from	0	hours	to	24	hours,	commencing	when	the	sun	or	vernal
equinoxis	onthe	meridian.	occasionallythe	attemptis	madetointroduceinto	common
use	this	mode	of	reckoning	the	hours,	beginning	the	day	(date)	at	midnight	and	counting
thehoursconsecutivelyupto24,	whenthenextdateisreachedandanewstart	made.
suchasystemwouldsimplifyrailwaytimetablesandsimilarpublicationsbutthe
american	publicisslowto	adoptitalthoughthesystem	has	comeinto	practical	usein
canada	and	spain.
54.	to	find	(approximately)	the	sidereal	time	at	any	moment.—rule	i.	when	the	mean
solar	time	is	known.	let	w	represent	the	time	shown	by	an	ordinary	watch,	and	represent
by	s	the	corresponding	sidereal	time	and	by	d	the	number	of	days	that	have	elapsed	from
march	23d	to	the	date	in	question.	then
s	=	w	+	69/70	×	d	×	4.
the	last	term	is	expressed	in	minutes,	and	should	be	reduced	to	hours	and	minutes.	thus
at	4	p.	m.	on	july	4th—
d103	days.
69/70	×	d406m6h.	46m.
w4h.	0m.
s10h.	46m.
the	daily	gain	of	sidereal	upon	mean	solar	time	is	69/70	of	4	minutes,	and	march	23d	is
the	date	on	which	sidereal	and	mean	solar	time	are	together,	taking	the	average	of	one	year
with	another,	but	it	varies	a	little	from	year	to	year	on	account	of	the	extra	day	introduced
in	leap	years.
rule	ii.	when	the	stars	in	the	northern	sky	can	be	seen.	find	β	cassiopeiæ,	and	imagine	a
line	drawn	from	it	to	polaris,	and	another	line	from	polaris	to	the	zenith.	the	sidereal	time
is	equal	to	the	angle	between	these	lines,	provided	that	that	angle	must	be	measured	from
the	zenith	toward	the	west.	turn	the	angle	from	degrees	into	hours	by	dividing	by	15.
55.	the	earth’s	rotation.—we	are	familiar	withthe	factthat	a	watch	may	run	faster	at
one	time	than	at	another,	and	it	is	worth	while	to	inquire	if	the	same	is	not	true	of	our	chief
timepiece—the	earth.	it	is	assumed	in	the	sections	upon	the	measurement	of	time	that	the
earth	turns	about	its	axis	with	absolute	uniformity,	so	that	mean	solar	time	never	gains	or
loses	even	the	smallest	fraction	of	a	second.	whether	this	be	absolutely	true	or	not,	no	one
haseversucceededinfindingconvincingproofofavariationlargeenoughtobe
measured,	although	it	has	recently	been	shown	that	the	axis	about	which	it	rotates	is	not
perfectly	fixed	within	the	body	of	the	earth.	the	solid	body	of	the	earth	wriggles	about	this
axis	like	a	fish	upon	a	hook,	so	that	the	position	of	the	north	pole	upon	the	earth’s	surface
changes	within	a	year	to	the	extent	of	40	or	50	feet	(15	meters)	without	ever	getting	more
thanthisdistanceawayfromitsaveragepositionthisisprobablycausedbythe
periodical	shifting	of	masses	of	air	and	water	from	one	part	of	the	earth	to	another	as	the
seasons	change,	and	it	seems	probable	that	these	changes	will	produce	some	small	effect
upon	the	rotation	of	the	earth.	but	in	spite	of	these,	for	any	such	moderate	interval	of	time
as	a	year	or	a	century,	so	far	as	present	knowledge	goes,	we	may	regard	the	earth’s	rotation
as	uniform	and	undisturbed.	for	longer	intervals—e.	g.,	1,000,000	or	10,000,000	years—
thequestionisaverydifferentoneandweshallhavetomeetitagaininanother
connection.
fig.	31.—longitude	and	time	fig.	31.—longitude	and	time
56.	longitudeandtime.—inwhatprecedestherehasbeenconstantreferencetothe
meridianthedaybeginswhenthesunisonthemeridiansolartimeistheangular
distance	of	the	sun	past	the	meridian.	sidereal	time	was	determined	by	observing	transits
of	stars	over	a	meridian	line	actually	laid	out	upon	the	ground,	etc.	but	every	place	upon
the	earth	hasits	own	meridianfrom	which	“thetime”	may	bereckoned,	andin	fig.	31,
wheretheraysofsunlightarerepresentedasfallinguponapartoftheearth’sequator
through	which	the	meridians	of	new	york,	chicago,	and	san	francisco	pass,	it	is	evident
that	these	rays	make	different	angles	with	the	meridians,	and	that	the	sun	is	farther	from
the	meridian	of	new	york	than	from	that	of	san	francisco	by	an	amount	just	equal	to	the
angle	at	o	between	these	meridians.	this	angle	is	called	by	geographers	the	difference	of
longitude	between	the	two	places,	and	the	student	should	note	that	the	word	longitude	is
here	used	in	a	different	sense	from	that	on	page	36.	from	fig.	31	we	obtain	the
theorem.—thedifferencebetween“thetimesatanytwomeridiansisequaltotheir
difference	of	longitude,	and	the	time	at	the	eastern	meridian	is	greater	than	at	the	western
meridianastronomersusuallyexpressdifferencesoflongitudeinhoursinsteadof
degrees.	1h.	=	15°.
the	name	given	to	any	kind	of	time	should	distinguish	all	the	elements	which	enter	into	it
—eg.,	new	yorksiderealtime	meansthehourangleofthevernalequinox	measured
fromthemeridianofnew	yorkchicagotruesolartimeisthehourangleofthesun
reckoned	from	the	meridian	of	chicago,	etc.
fig.	32.—standard	time.
fig.	32.—standard	time.
57.	standard	time.—the	requirements	of	railroad	traffic	have	led	to	the	use	throughout
the	united	states	and	canada	of	four	“standard	times,”	each	of	which	is	a	mean	solar	time
some	integral	number	of	hours	slower	than	the	time	of	the	meridian	passing	through	the
royal	observatory	at	greenwich,	england.
easterntime	ishoursslowerthanthatof	greenwich.
central“
mountain“
pacific“
in	fig.	32	the	broken	lines	indicate	roughly	the	parts	of	the	united	states	and	canada	in
which	these	several	kinds	of	time	are	used,	and	illustrate	how	irregular	are	the	boundaries
of	these	parts.
standard	time	is	sent	daily	into	all	of	the	more	important	telegraph	offices	of	the	united
statesandservestoregulatewatchesandclockstothealmostcompleteexclusionof
local	time.
58.	to	determine	the	longitude.—with	an	ordinary	watch	observe	the	time	of	the	sun’s
transit	over	your	local	meridian,	and	correct	the	observed	time	for	the	equation	of	time	by
means	of	the	curve	in	fig.	30.	the	difference	between	the	corrected	time	and	12	o’clock
willbethecorrectionofyourwatchreferredtolocalmeansolartimecompareyour
watch	with	the	time	signals	in	the	nearest	telegraph	office	and	find	its	correction	referred
tostandardtimethedifferencebetweenthetwocorrectionsisthedifferencebetween
your	longitude	and	that	of	the	standard	meridian.
n.	b.—don’t	tamper	with	the	watch	by	trying	to	“set	it	right.”	no	harm	will	be	done	if	it
is	wrong,	provided	you	take	due	account	of	the	correction	as	indicated	above.
ifthe	correction	ofthe	watch	changed	between	your	observation	andthe	comparisonin
the	telegraph	office,	what	effect	would	it	have	upon	the	longitude	determination?	how	can
you	avoid	this	effect?
59.	chronology.—the	century	dictionary	defines	chronology	as	“the	science	of	time”—
thatis“themethodofmeasuringorcomputingtimebyregulardivisionsorperiods
according	to	the	revolutions	of	the	sun	or	moon.”
we	have	already	seen	that	for	the	measurement	of	short	intervals	of	time	the	day	and	its
subdivisions—hours,	minutes,	seconds—furnish	a	very	complete	and	convenient	system.
but	for	longer	periods,	extending	to	hundreds	and	thousands	of	days,	a	larger	unit	of	time
is	required,	and	for	the	most	part	these	longer	units	have	in	all	ages	and	among	all	peoples
been	based	upon	astronomical	considerations.	but	to	this	there	is	one	marked	exception.
the	week	is	a	simple	multiple	of	the	day,	as	the	dime	is	a	multiple	of	the	cent,	and	while	it
may	have	had	its	origin	in	the	changing	phases	of	the	moon	this	is	at	best	doubtful,	since	it
does	not	follow	these	with	any	considerable	accuracy.	if	the	still	longer	units	of	time—the
monthandtheyear—hadequallybeen	madetoconsistofanintegralnumberofdays
much	confusion	and	misunderstanding	might	have	been	avoided,	and	the	annals	of	ancient
times	would	have	presented	fewer	pitfalls	to	the	historian	than	is	now	the	case.	the	month
is	plainly	connected	with	the	motion	of	the	moon	among	the	stars.	the	year	is,	of	course,
based	upon	the	motion	of	the	sun	through	the	heavens	and	the	change	of	seasons	which	is
thusproducedalthoughascommonlyemployeditisnotquitethesameasthetime
requiredbytheearthtomakeonecompleterevolutioninitsorbitthistimeofone
revolution	is	called	a	sidereal	year,	while,	as	we	have	already	seen	in	chapter	v,	the	year
which	measures	the	course	of	the	seasons	is	shorter	than	this	on	account	of	the	precession
oftheequinoxesitiscalledatropicalyear	withreferencetothecircuit	whichthesun
makes	from	one	tropic	to	the	other	and	back	again.
wecanreadilyunderstandwhyprimitivepeoplesshouldadoptasunitsoftimethese
naturalperiodsbutinso	doingtheyincurred	muchthesame	kind	ofdifficultythat	we
shouldexperienceintryingtousebothenglishandamericanmoneyintheordinary
transactions	of	life.	how	many	dollars	make	a	pound	sterling?	how	shall	we	make	change
with	english	shillings	and	american	dimes,	etc.?	how	much	is	one	unit	worth	in	terms	of
the	other?
one	of	the	greek	poets[b]	has	left	us	a	quaint	account	of	the	confusion	which	existed	in	his
time	with	regard	to	the	place	of	months	and	moons	in	the	calendar:
“the	moon	by	us	to	you	her	greeting	sends,
but	bids	us	say	that	she’s	an	ill-used	moon
and	takes	it	much	amiss	that	you	will	still
shuffle	her	days	and	turn	them	topsy-turvy,
so	that	when	gods,	who	know	their	feast	days	well,
by	your	false	count	are	sent	home	supperless,
they	scold	and	storm	at	her	for	your	neglectdaymonthandyear.—ifthedaythemonthandtheyeararetobeused
concurrently,	it	is	necessary	to	determine	how	many	days	are	contained	in	the	month	and
year,	and	whenthis	has	been	done	bythe	astronomerthe	numbers	arefoundto	be	very
awkward	and	inconvenient	for	daily	use;	and	much	of	the	history	of	chronology	consists
in	an	account	of	the	various	devices	by	which	ingenious	men	have	sought	to	use	integral
numbers	to	replace	the	cumbrous	decimal	fractions	which	follow.
according	to	professor	harkness,	for	the	epoch	1900	a.	d.—
onetropicalyear365.242197	mean	solar	days365d.	5h.	48m.	45.8s.
onelunation29.530588	mean	solar	days29d.	12h.	44m.	2.8s.
the	word	lunation	means	the	average	interval	from	one	new	moon	to	the	next	one—i.	e.,
the	time	required	by	the	moon	to	go	from	conjunction	with	the	sun	round	to	conjunction
again.
a	very	ancient	device	was	to	call	a	year	equal	to	365	days,	and	to	have	months	alternately
of	29	and	30	days	in	length,	but	this	was	unsatisfactory	in	more	than	one	way.	at	the	end
of	four	years	this	artificial	calendar	would	be	about	one	day	ahead	of	the	true	one,	at	the
end	of	forty	years	ten	days	in	error,	and	within	a	single	lifetime	the	seasons	would	have
appreciablychangedtheirpositionintheyearaprilweatherbeingdueinmarch,
according	to	the	calendar.	so,	too,	the	year	under	this	arrangement	did	not	consist	of	any
integral	number	of	months,	12	months	of	the	average	length	of	29.5	days	being	354	days,
and	13	months	383.5	days,	thus	making	any	particular	month	change	its	position	from	the
beginning	to	the	middle	and	the	end	of	the	year	within	a	comparatively	short	time.	some
peoples	gave	up	the	astronomical	year	as	an	independent	unit	and	adopted	a	conventional
year	of	12	lunar	months,	354	days,	which	is	now	in	use	in	certain	mohammedan	countries,
where	it	is	known	as	the	wandering	year,	with	reference	to	the	changing	positions	of	the
seasonsinsuchayearothersheldtotheastronomicalyearandadoptedasystemof
conventional	months,	such	thattwelve	ofthem	would	just	make	up	a	year,	asis	done	to
thisdayinourowncalendarwhosemonthsofarbitrarylengthwearecompelledto
remember	by	some	such	jingle	as	the	following:
“thirty	days	hath	september,
april,	june,	and	november;
all	the	rest	have	thirty-one
save	february,
which	alone	hath	twenty-eight,
till	leap	year	gives	it	twenty-nine.”
61.	thecalendar.—thefoundationsofourcalendarmayfairlybeascribedtojulius
cæsarwhoundertheadviceoftheegyptianastronomersosiginesadoptedtheold
egyptiandeviceofaleapyear,	wherebyeveryfourthyear	wastoconsistofdays,
while	ordinary	years	were	only	365	days	long.	he	also	placed	the	beginning	of	the	year	at
thefirst	ofjanuaryinstead	ofin	march,	whereit	hadformerly	been,	and	gave	his	own
name,	julius,	to	the	month	which	we	now	call	july.	august	was	afterward	named	in	honor
of	his	successor,	augustus.	the	names	ofthe	earlier	months	ofthe	year	are	drawn	from
roman	mythology;	those	of	the	later	months,	september,	october,	etc.,	meaning	seventh
montheighth	monthrepresenttheplacesofthese	monthsintheyearbeforecæsar’s
reformationandalsotheirplacesinsomeofthesubsequentcalendarsforthewidest
diversity	of	practice	existed	during	mediævaltimes	with	regardtothe	day	on	whichthe
new	year	should	begin,	christmas,	easter,	march	25th,	and	others	having	been	employed
at	different	times	and	places.
the	system	of	leap	years	introduced	by	cæsar	makes	the	average	length	of	a	year	365.25
days,	which	differs	by	abouteleven	minutesfromthetruelength	ofthetropical	yeara
difference	so	small	that	for	ordinary	purposes	no	better	approximation	to	the	true	length	of
the	year	need	be	desired.	but	any	deviation	from	the	true	length,	however	small,	must	in
the	course	of	time	shiftthe	seasonsthe	vernal	and	autumnal	equinox,	to	another	part	of
theyearandtheecclesiasticalauthoritiesofmediævaleuropefoundheregroundfor
objectiontocæsar’scalendarsincethegreatchurchfestivalofeasterhasitsdate
determined	withreferencetothevernalequinoxand	withthelapseofcenturies	easter
became	moreand	moredisplacedinthecalendaruntilpopegregoryxiiilateinthe
sixteenth	century,	decreed	another	reformation,	whereby	ten	days	were	dropped	from	the
calendarthedayaftermarch11thbeingcalledmarch21sttobringbackthevernal
equinox	to	the	date	on	which	it	fell	in	a.	d.	325,	the	time	of	the	council	of	nicæa,	which
gregory	adopted	as	the	fundamental	epoch	of	his	calendar.
the	calendar	having	thus	been	brought	back	into	agreement	with	that	of	old	time,	gregory
purposed	to	keep	it	in	such	agreement	for	the	future	by	modifying	cæsar’s	leap-year	rule
so	that	it	should	run:	every	year	whose	number	is	divisible	by	4	shall	be	a	leap	year	except
thoseyearswhosenumbersaredivisiblebybutnotdivisiblebytheselatter
years—eg1900—arecountedascommonyearsthecalendarthusalterediscalled
gregorian	to	distinguish	it	from	the	older,	julian	calendar,	and	it	found	speedy	acceptance
inthosecivilizedcountries	whosechurchadheredtoromebuttheprotestantpowers
were	slow	to	adopt	it,	and	it	was	introduced	into	england	and	her	american	colonies	by
act	of	parliament	in	the	year	1752,	nearly	two	centuries	after	gregory’s	time.	in	russia	the
julian	calendar	has	remained	in	common	use	to	our	own	day,	but	in	commercial	affairs	it
is	there	customary	to	write	the	date	according	to	both	calendars—e.	g.,	july	4/16,	and	at
thepresenttimestrenuousexertionsare	makinginthatcountryfortheadoptionofthe
gregorian	calendar	to	the	complete	exclusion	of	the	julian	one.
the	julian	and	gregorian	calendars	are	frequently	represented	by	the	abbreviations	o.	s.
and	n.	s.,	old	style,	new	style,	and	asthe	older	historical	dates	are	usually	expressed	in
o.	sitis	sometimes	convenient	to	transform	a	date	from	the	one	calendar	to	the	other.
this	is	readily	done	by	the	formula
g	=	j	+	(n	-	2)	-	n/4,
where	g	and	j	are	the	respective	dates,	n	is	the	number	of	the	century,	and	the	remainder
is	to	be	neglected	in	the	division	by	4.	for	september	3,	1752,	o.	s.,	we	have
g=sept.	14
j=sept.	3
n	-	2=+	15
-	n/4=-	4
and	septemberisthedatefixed	byactof	parliamenttocorrespondto	septemberoscolumbusdiscoveredamericaonoctoberoswhatisthe
corresponding	date	in	the	gregorian	calendar?
62.	the	day	of	the	week.—a	problem	similar	to	the	above	but	more	complicated	consists
in	finding	the	day	of	the	week	on	which	any	given	date	of	the	gregorian	calendar	falls—
e.	g.,	october	21,	1492.
the	formula	for	this	case	is
7q	+	r	=	y	+	d	+	(y	-	1)/4	-	(y	-	1)/100	+	(y	-	1)/400
where	y	denotes	the	given	year,	d	the	number	of	the	day	(date)	in	that	year,	and	q	and	r
are	respectively	the	quotient	and	the	remainder	obtained	by	dividing	the	second	member
of	the	equation	by	7.	if	r	=	1	the	date	falls	on	sunday,	etc.,	and	if	r	=	0	the	day	is	saturday.
for	the	example	suggested	above	we	have
jan31
feb29
mch31
d	=295
april30
may31
june30
july31
aug31
sept30
oct21
q306
r6=	friday.
y1492
+	d+	295
+	(y+	372
-	(y-	14
+	(y7	)	2148
find	from	some	history	the	day	of	the	week	on	which	columbus	first	saw	america,	and
compare	this	with	the	above.
on	what	day	of	the	week	did	last	christmas	fall?	on	what	day	of	the	week	were	you	born?
in	the	formula	for	the	day	of	the	week	why	does	q	have	the	coefficient	7?	what	principles
in	the	calendar	give	rise	to	the	divisors	4,	100,	400?
for	muchcuriousandinterestinginformationabout	methodsofreckoningthelapseof
timethestudentmayconsultthearticlescalendarandchronologyinanygood
encyclopædia.
the	yerkes	observatory,	williams	bay,	wis.
the	yerkes	observatory,	williams	bay,	wis.

chapter	vii
eclipses
63.	the	natureofeclipses.—everyplanethasashadow	whichtravels	withtheplanet
along	its	orbit,	always	pointing	directly	away	from	the	sun,	and	cutting	off	from	a	certain
region	of	space	the	sunlight	which	otherwise	would	fill	it.	for	the	most	part	these	shadows
are	invisible,	but	occasionally	one	of	them	falls	upon	a	planet	or	some	other	body	which
shinesbyreflectedsunlightandcuttingoffitssupplyoflightproducesthestriking
phenomenonwhichwecallaneclipsethesatellitesofjupitersaturnandmarsare
eclipsedwhenevertheyplungeintotheshadowscastbytheirrespectiveplanetsand
jupiter	himself	is	partially	eclipsed	when	one	of	his	own	satellites	passes	between	him	and
the	sun,	and	casts	upon	his	broad	surface	a	shadow	too	small	to	cover	more	than	a	fraction
of	it.
but	the	eclipses	of	most	interest	to	us	are	those	of	the	sun	and	moon,	called	respectively
solar	and	lunar	eclipses.	in	fig.	33	the	full	moon,	mis	shown	immersed	inthe	shadow
castbytheearthandthereforeeclipsedandinthesamefigurethenew	moon,	mis
shown	as	casting	its	shadow	upon	the	earth	and	producing	an	eclipse	of	the	sun.	from	a
mereinspection	ofthefigure	we	maylearnthatan	eclipse	ofthesun	can	occur	only	at
new	moon—i.	e.,	when	the	moon	is	on	line	between	the	earth	and	sun—and	an	eclipse	of
the	moon	can	occur	only	atfull	moon.	why?	alsothe	eclipsed	moon,	m’,	will	present
substantially	the	same	appearance	from	every	part	of	the	earth	where	it	is	at	all	visible—
the	same	from	north	america	as	from	south	america—but	the	eclipsed	sun	will	present
verydifferentaspectsfromdifferentpartsoftheearththusatlwithinthemoon’s
shadowthe	sunlight	will	be	entirely	cut	off,	producing	whatis	called	atotal	eclipse.	at
points	of	the	earth’s	surface	near	j	and	k	there	will	be	no	interference	whatever	with	the
sunlight,	and	no	eclipse,	since	the	moon	is	quite	off	the	line	joining	these	regions	to	any
part	of	the	sun.	at	places	between	j	and	l	or	k	and	l	the	moon	will	cut	off	a	part	of	the
sun’slightbut	notallofitand	willproduce	whatiscalled	a	partialeclipse,	whichas
seen	from	the	northern	parts	of	the	earth,	will	be	an	eclipse	of	the	lower	(southern)	part	of
the	sun,	and	as	seen	from	the	southern	hemisphere	will	be	an	eclipse	of	the	northern	part
of	the	sun.
fig.	33.—different	kinds	of	eclipse.
fig.	33.—different	kinds	of	eclipse.
the	moonrevolvesaroundtheearthinaplane,	whichinthefigure,	wesupposetobe
perpendicular	to	the	surface	of	the	paper,	and	to	pass	through	the	sun	along	the	line	m’	m
produced.	but	it	frequently	happens	that	this	plane	is	turned	to	one	side	of	the	sun,	along
some	such	line	as	p	q,	and	in	this	case	the	full	moon	would	cut	through	the	edge	of	the
earth’s	shadow	without	being	at	any	time	wholly	immersed	in	it,	giving	a	partial	eclipse	of
the	moon,	as	is	shown	in	the	figure.
in	what	parts	of	the	earth	would	this	eclipse	be	visible?	what	kinds	of	solar	eclipse	would
be	produced	by	the	new	moon	at	q?	in	what	parts	of	the	earth	would	they	be	visible?
64.	theshadow	cone.—theshapeandpositionoftheearth’sshadowareindicatedin
fig.	33	by	the	lines	drawn	tangent	to	the	circles	which	represent	the	sun	and	earth,	since	it
is	only	between	these	lines	that	the	earth	interferes	with	the	free	radiation	of	sunlight,	and
since	both	sun	and	earth	arespheres,	andthe	earthis	muchthe	smaller	ofthetwoitis
evident	that	the	earth’s	shadow	must	be,	in	geometrical	language,	a	cone	whose	base	is	at
the	earth,	and	whose	vertex	lies	far	to	the	right	of	the	figure—in	other	words,	the	earth’s
shadow,	although	very	long,	tapers	off	finally	to	a	point	and	ends.	so,	too,	the	shadow	of
the	moon	is	a	cone,	having	its	base	at	the	moon	and	its	vertex	turned	away	from	the	sun,
and,	as	shown	in	the	figure,	just	about	long	enough	to	reach	the	earth.
it	is	easily	shown,	by	the	theorem	of	similar	triangles	in	connection	with	the	known	size	of
the	earth	and	sun,	that	the	distance	from	the	center	of	the	earth	to	the	vertex	of	its	shadow
is	always	equaltothe	distance	ofthe	earthfrom	the	sun	divided	by	108,	and,	similarly,
thatthelength	ofthe	moon’s	shadow	is	equaltothe	distance	ofthe	moon	fromthe	sun
divided	by	400,	the	moon’s	shadow	being	the	smaller	and	shorter	of	the	two,	because	the
moon	is	smaller	than	the	earth.	the	radius	of	the	moon’s	orbit	is	just	about	1/400th	part	of
the	radius	of	the	earth’s	orbit—i.	e.,	the	distance	of	the	moon	from	the	earth	is	1/400th	part
ofthe	distance	ofthe	earthfrom	the	sun,	anditisthis	“chance”	agreement	betweenthe
length	of	the	moon’s	shadow	and	the	distance	of	the	moon	from	the	earth	which	makes	the
tip	of	the	moon’s	shadow	fall	very	near	the	earth	at	the	time	of	solar	eclipses.	indeed,	the
elliptical	shape	of	the	moon’s	orbit	produces	considerable	variations	in	the	distance	of	the
moonfromtheearthandinconsequenceofthesevariationsthevertexoftheshadow
sometimesfallsshortofreachingtheearthandsometimesevenprojectsconsiderably
beyond	its	farther	side.	when	the	moon’s	distance	is	too	great	for	the	shadow	to	bridge	the
space	betweenearthand	moontherecanbenototaleclipseofthesunforthereisno
shadow	which	can	fall	upon	the	earth,	even	though	the	moon	does	come	directly	between
earth	and	sun.	but	there	is	then	produced	a	peculiar	kind	of	partial	eclipse	called	annular,
orring-shaped,	becausethe	moon,	although	eclipsingthe	central	parts	ofthe	sunis	not
large	enough	to	cover	the	whole	of	it,	but	leaves	the	sun’s	edge	visible	as	a	ring	of	light,
which	completely	surroundsthe	moon.	although,	strictly	speakingthisis	only	a	partial
eclipseitiscustomarytoputtotalandannulareclipsestogetherinoneclass,	whichis
called	central	eclipses,	since	in	these	eclipses	the	line	of	centers	of	sun	and	moon	strikes
theearthwhileinordinarypartialeclipsesitpassestoonesideoftheearthwithout
striking	it.	in	this	latter	case	we	have	to	consider	another	cone	called	the	penumbra—i.	e.,
partialshadow—whichisshowninfigbythebrokenlinestangenttothesunand
moon,	and	crossing	at	the	point	v,	which	is	the	vertex	of	this	cone.	this	penumbral	cone
includes	within	its	surface	all	that	region	of	space	within	which	the	moon	cuts	off	any	of
thesunlightandofcourseitincludestheshadowconewhichproducestotaleclipses.
wherever	the	penumbra	falls	there	will	be	a	solar	eclipse	of	some	kind,	and	the	nearer	the
placeistothe	axis	ofthe	penumbrathe	more	nearlytotal	will	bethe	eclipse.	sincethe
moonstandsaboutmidwaybetweentheearthandthevertexofthepenumbrathe
diameterofthepenumbra	whereitstrikestheearth	willbeabouttwiceasgreatasthe
diameter	of	the	moon,	and	the	student	should	be	able	to	show	from	this	that	the	region	of
the	earth’s	surface	within	which	a	partial	solar	eclipse	is	visible	extends	in	a	straight	line
about	2,100	miles	on	either	side	of	the	region	where	the	eclipse	is	total.	measured	along
the	curved	surface	of	the	earth,	this	distance	is	frequently	much	greater.
is	it	true	that	if	at	any	time	the	axis	of	the	shadow	cone	comes	within	2,100	miles	of	the
earth’s	surface	a	partial	eclipse	will	be	visible	in	those	parts	of	the	earth	nearest	the	axis	of
the	shadowdifferentcharacteristicsoflunarandsolareclipses.—onemarkeddifference
between	lunar	and	solar	eclipses	which	has	been	already	suggested,	may	be	learned	from
fig.	33.	the	full	moon,	m’,	will	be	seen	eclipsed	from	every	part	of	the	earth	where	it	is
visibleatallatthetime	oftheeclipse—thatisfromthe	wholenightsideoftheearth;
while	the	eclipsed	sun	will	be	seen	eclipsed	only	from	those	parts	ofthe	day	side	of	the
earth	upon	which	the	moon’s	shadow	or	penumbra	falls.	since	the	point	of	the	shadow	at
best	but	little	more	than	reaches	to	the	earth,	the	amount	of	space	upon	the	earth	which	it
can	cover	at	any	one	moment	is	very	small,	seldom	more	than	100	to	200	miles	in	length,
and	it	is	only	within	the	space	thus	actually	covered	by	the	shadow	that	the	sun	is	at	any
givenmomenttotallyeclipsedbutwithinthisregionthesundisappearsabsolutely,
behindthesolidbodyofthemoonleavingtoviewonlysuchoutlyingpartsand
appendages	as	are	too	large	for	the	moon	to	cover.	at	a	lunar	eclipse,	on	the	other	hand,
the	earth	coming	between	sun	and	moon	cuts	offthelightfrom	thelatter,	but,	curiously
enough,	does	not	cut	it	off	so	completely	that	the	moon	disappears	altogether	from	sight
even	in	mid-eclipse.	the	explanation	of	this	continued	visibility	is	furnished	by	the	broken
linesextendinginfigfromtheearththroughthe	moontheserepresentsunlight,
which,	entering	the	earth’s	atmosphere	near	the	edge	of	the	earth	(edge	as	seen	from	sun
andmoonpassesthroughitandemergesinachangeddirectionrefractedintothe
shadow	coneandfeeblyilluminesthe	moon’ssurface	witharuddylightlikethatoften
shown	in	our	red	sunsets.	eclipse	and	sunset	alike	show	that	when	the	sun’s	light	shines
throughdenselayersofairitistheredrays	whichcomethrough	mostfreelyandthe
attentive	observer	may	often	see	at	a	clear	sunset	something	which	corresponds	exactly	to
the	bending	of	the	sunlight	into	the	shadow	cone;	just	before	the	sun	reaches	the	horizon
its	disk	is	distorted	from	a	circle	into	an	oval	whose	horizontal	diameter	is	longer	than	the
vertical	one	(see	§	50).
query.—atatotallunareclipsewhatwouldbetheeffectupontheappearanceofthe
moon	if	the	atmosphere	around	the	edge	of	the	earth	were	heavily	laden	with	clouds?
66.	the	track	of	the	shadow.—we	may	regard	the	moon’s	shadow	cone	as	a	huge	pencil
attachedtothe	moon,	movingwithitalongitsorbitinthedirectionofthearrowhead
(fig.	34),	and	as	it	moves	drawing	a	black	line	across	the	face	of	the	earth	at	the	time	of
total	eclipse.	this	black	line	is	the	path	of	the	shadow	and	marks	out	those	regions	within
which	the	eclipse	will	be	total	at	some	stage	of	its	progress.	if	the	point	of	the	shadow	just
reachesthe	earthitstrace	will	have	nosensible	width,	whileifthe	moonis	nearerthe
point	of	the	cone	will	be	broken	off,	and,	like	a	blunt	pencilit	will	draw	a	broad	streak
across	the	earth,	and	this	under	the	most	favorable	circumstances	may	have	a	breadth	of	a
little	more	than	160	miles	and	a	length	of	10,000	or	12,000	miles.	the	student	should	be
able	to	show	from	the	known	distance	of	the	moon	(240,000	miles)	and	the	known	interval
betweenconsecutivenewmoonsdaysthatontheaveragethemoon’sshadow
sweeps	pastthe	earth	attherate	of	2,100	miles	per	hour,	andthatin	a	general	waythis
motion	is	from	westto	east,	since	thatisthe	direction	ofthe	moon’s	motion	inits	orbit.
theactualvelocitywithwhichthemoon’sshadowmovespastagivenstationmay,
however,	be	considerably	greater	or	less	than	this,	since	on	the	one	hand	when	the	shadow
falls	very	obliquely,	as	when	the	eclipse	occurs	near	sunrise	or	sunset,	the	shifting	of	the
shadow	will	be	very	much	greater	than	the	actual	motion	of	the	moon	which	produces	it,
andontheotherhandtheearthinrevolvinguponitsaxiscarriesthespectatorandthe
ground	upon	which	he	stands	along	the	same	direction	in	which	the	shadow	is	moving.	at
theequatorwiththesunand	moonoverheadthis	motionoftheearthsubtractsabout
1,000	miles	per	hour	from	the	velocity	with	which	the	shadow	passes	by.	it	is	chiefly	on
thisaccountthediminishedvelocity	with	whichtheshadowpassesbythattotalsolar
eclipseslastlongerinthetropicsthaninhigherlatitudesbutevenunderthemost
favorable	circumstancesthe	duration	oftotality	does	notreach	eight	minutes	at	any	one
place,	although	it	may	take	the	shadow	several	hours	to	sweep	the	entire	length	of	its	path
across	the	earth.
according	to	whitmellthe	greatest	possible	duration	of	atotal	solar	eclipse	is	7m.	40s.,
and	it	can	attain	this	limit	only	when	the	eclipse	occurs	near	the	beginning	of	july	and	is
visible	at	a	place	5°	north	of	the	equator.
the	duration	of	a	lunar	eclipse	depends	mainly	upon	the	position	of	the	moon	with	respect
tothe	earth’s	shadow.	ifit	strikesthe	shadow	centrally,	as	at	m’,	fig.	33,	atotal	eclipse
maylastforabouttwo	hours,	withanadditionalhouratthe	beginningandendduring
which	the	moon	is	entering	and	leaving	the	earth’s	shadow.	if	the	moon	meets	the	shadow
atonesideoftheaxisasat	pthetotalphaseoftheeclipse	mayfailaltogetherand
betweentheseextremesthedurationoftotalitymaybeanythingfromtwohours
downward.
fig.	34.—relation	of	the	lunar	nodes	to	eclipses.
fig.	34.—relation	of	the	lunar	nodes	to	eclipsesrelationofthelunarnodestoeclipses.—toshowwhythemoonsometimes
encounterstheearth’sshadowcentrallyandmorefrequentlyatfullmoonpassesby
without	touching	it	at	all,	we	resort	to	fig.	34,	which	represents	a	part	of	the	orbit	of	the
earth	about	the	sun,	with	dates	showing	the	time	in	each	year	at	which	the	earth	passes	the
part	of	its	orbit	thus	marked.	the	orbit	of	the	moon	about	the	earth,	m	m’,	is	also	shown,
withthenewmoon,	mcastingitsshadowtowardtheearthandthefullmoon,	m’,
apparentlyimmersedinthe	earth’s	shadow.	but	here	appearances	are	deceptive,	andthe
student	who	has	made	the	observations	set	forth	in	chapter	iii	haslearned	for	himself	a
fact	of	which	careful	account	must	now	be	taken.	the	apparent	paths	of	the	moon	and	sun
among	the	stars	are	great	circles	which	lie	near	each	other,	but	are	not	exactly	the	same;
andsincethese	greatcirclesare	onlytheintersections	ofthesky	withthe	planes	ofthe
earth’s	orbitandthe	moon’s	orbit,	weseethatthese	planes	areslightlyinclinedto	each
other	and	must	therefore	intersect	along	some	line	passing	through	the	center	of	the	earth.
thisline,	n’	nisshowninthefigureandif	wesupposethesurfaceofthepaperto
representthe	plane	ofthe	earth’s	orbit,	we	shall	haveto	supposethe	moon’s	orbitto	be
tipped	around	this	line,	so	that	the	left	side	of	the	orbit	lies	above	and	the	right	side	below
the	surface	of	the	paper.	but	since	the	earth’s	shadow	lies	in	the	plane	of	its	orbit—i.	e.,	in
thesurfaceofthepaper—thefullmoonofmarch,	mmusthavepassedbelowthe
shadow,	and	the	new	moon,	m,	must	have	cast	its	shadow	above	the	earth,	so	that	neither	a
lunar	nor	a	solar	eclipse	could	occur	in	that	month.	but	toward	the	end	of	may	the	earth
and	moon	have	reached	a	position	where	the	line	n’	n”	points	almost	directly	toward	the
sunin	line	with	the	shadow	cones	which	hide	it.	note	thatthe	line	n’	nremains	very
nearly	paralleltoits	original	position,	whilethe	earth	is	moving	alongits	orbit.	the	full
moon	will	now	be	very	near	this	line	and	therefore	very	close	to	the	plane	of	the	earth’s
orbit,	if	not	actually	in	it,	and	must	pass	through	the	shadow	of	the	earth	and	be	eclipsed.
so	alsothe	new	moon	will	castits	shadow	inthe	plane	ofthe	ecliptic,	and	this	shadow,
falling	upon	the	earth,	produced	the	total	solar	eclipse	of	may	28,	1900.
n’	n”	is	called	the	line	of	nodes	of	the	moon’s	orbit	(§	39),	and	the	two	positions	of	the
earth	in	its	orbit,	diametrically	opposite	each	other,	at	which	n’	n”	points	exactly	toward
the	sun,	we	shall	callthe	nodes	ofthelunar	orbit.	strictly	speakingthe	nodes	arethose
points	of	the	sky	against	which	the	moon’s	center	is	projected	at	the	moment	when	in	its
orbitalmotionitcutsthroughtheplaneoftheearth’sorbitbearinginmindthese
definitionswe	maycondense	muchofwhatprecedesintothepropositioneclipsesof
eithersun	or	moon	can	occur	only	whenthe	earthisat	or	near	one	ofthe	nodes	ofthe
moon’sorbitcorrespondingtothesepositionsoftheearththereareineachyeartwo
seasonsaboutsix	monthsapartatwhichtimesandattheseonlyeclipsescanoccur.
thus	in	the	year	1900	the	earth	passed	these	two	points	on	june	2d	and	november	24th
respectively,	and	the	following	list	of	eclipses	which	occurred	in	that	year	shows	that	all	of
them	were	within	a	few	days	of	one	or	the	other	of	these	dates:
eclipses	of	the	year	1900
total	solar	eclipsemay	28th.
partial	lunar	eclipsejune	12th.
annular	(solar)	eclipsenovember	21st.
68.	eclipselimits.—iftheearthisexactlyatthenodeatthetimeofnewmoonthe
moon’s	shadow	willfall	centrally	uponit	and	will	produce	an	eclipse	visible	withinthe
torrid	zone,	since	this	is	that	part	of	the	earth’s	surface	nearest	the	plane	of	its	orbit.	if	the
earthis	near	but	notatthe	nodethe	new	moon	willstand	alittle	north	orsouth	ofthe
plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit,	and	its	shadow	will	strike	the	earth	farther	north	or	south	than
before,	producing	an	eclipse	in	the	temperate	or	frigid	zones;	or	the	shadow	may	even	pass
entirelyaboveorbelowtheearthproducingnoeclipsewhateveroratmostapartial
eclipse	visible	near	the	north	or	south	pole.	just	how	many	days’	motion	the	earth	may	be
awayfromthe	nodeandstillpermitaneclipseisshowninthefollowing	brieftableof
eclipse	limits,	as	they	are	called:
solar	eclipse	limits
if	at	any	new	moon	the	earth	is
less	than	10	days	awayfromanodea	central	eclipse	is	certain.
between	10	and	16	dayssome	kind	of	eclipse	is	certain.
between	16	and	19	daysa	partial	eclipse	is	possible.
more	than	19	daysno	eclipse	is	possible.
lunar	eclipse	limits
if	at	any	full	moon	the	earth	is
less	than	4	days	awayfromanodea	total	eclipse	is	certain.
between	4	and	10	dayssome	kind	of	eclipse	is	certain.
between	10	and	14	daysa	partial	eclipse	is	possible.
more	than	14	daysno	eclipse	is	possible.
fromthistableofeclipselimitswemaydrawsomeinterestingconclusionsaboutthe
frequency	with	which	eclipses	occur.
69.	number	of	eclipses	in	a	year.—whenever	the	earth	passes	a	node	of	the	moon’s	orbit
a	new	moon	must	occur	at	some	time	during	the	2	×	16	days	that	the	earth	remains	inside
the	limits	where	some	kind	of	eclipse	is	certain,	and	there	must	therefore	be	an	eclipse	of
the	sun	everytimethe	earth	passes	a	node	ofthe	moon’s	orbit.	but,	sincethere	aretwo
nodes	past	whichthe	earth	moves	atleast	oncein	each	yearthere	must	be	atleasttwo
solareclipseseveryyearcantherebe	morethantwo?	ontheaverage,	willcentralor
partial	eclipses	be	the	more	numerous?
a	similarline	ofreasoning	willnot	holdtrueforeclipses	ofthe	moonsinceitisquite
possible	that	no	full	moon	should	occur	during	the	20	days	required	by	the	earth	to	move
past	the	node	from	the	western	to	the	eastern	limit.	this	omission	of	a	full	moon	while	the
earth	is	within	the	eclipse	limits	sometimes	happens	at	both	nodes	in	the	same	year,	and
then	wehaveayear	withnoeclipseofthe	moonthestudent	maynoteinthelistof
eclipses	for	1900	that	the	partial	lunar	eclipse	of	june	12th	occurred	10	days	after	the	earth
passed	the	node,	and	was	therefore	within	the	doubtful	zone	where	eclipses	may	occur	and
mayfailandcorrespondingtothispositiontheeclipsewasaverysmalloneonlya
thousandth	part	of	the	moon’s	diameter	dipping	into	the	shadow	of	the	earth.	by	so	much
the	year	1900	escaped	being	an	illustration	of	a	year	in	which	no	lunar	eclipse	occurred.
a	partial	eclipse	ofthe	moon	will	usually	occur	about	afortnight	before	or	after	atotal
eclipse	of	the	sun,	since	the	full	moon	will	then	be	within	the	eclipse	limit	at	the	opposite
node.	a	partial	eclipse	of	the	sun	will	always	occur	about	a	fortnight	before	or	after	a	total
eclipse	of	the	moon.
fig.	35.—the	eclipse	of	may	28,	1900.
fig.	35.—the	eclipse	of	may	28,	1900.
70.	eclipse	maps.—itisthecustom	ofastronomerstoprepareinadvance	ofthe	more
importanteclipses,	mapsshowingthetraceofthe	moon’sshadow	acrosstheearthand
indicating	the	times	of	beginning	and	ending	of	the	eclipses,	as	is	shown	in	fig.	35.	while
the	actual	construction	of	such	a	map	requires	much	technical	knowledgethe	principles
involved	are	simple	enough:	the	straight	line	passed	through	the	center	of	sun	and	moon	is
theaxisoftheshadowconeandthemapcontainslittlemorethanagraphical
representationof	whenand	wherethiscone	meetsthesurfaceoftheearth.	thusinthe
mapthe“pathof	total	eclipseisthetrace	oftheshadow	coneacrossthefaceofthe
earth,	and	the	width	of	this	path	shows	that	the	earth	encountered	the	shadow	considerably
inside	the	vertex	of	the	cone.	the	general	direction	of	the	path	is	from	west	to	east,	and	the
slight	sinuousities	which	it	presents	are	for	the	most	part	due	to	unavoidable	distortion	of
the	map	caused	bythe	attemptto	representthe	curved	surface	ofthe	earth	upon	the	flat
surface	of	the	paper.	on	either	side	of	the	path	of	total	eclipse	is	the	region	within	which
the	eclipse	was	only	partial,	and	the	broken	lines	marked	begins	at	3h.,	ends	at	3h.,	show
the	intersection	of	the	penumbral	cone	with	the	surface	of	the	earth	at	3	p.	m.,	greenwich
time.	these	two	lines	inclose	every	part	of	the	earth’s	surface	from	which	at	that	time	any
eclipse	whatever	could	be	seen,	and	at	this	moment	the	partial	eclipse	was	just	beginning
at	every	point	on	the	eastern	edge	of	the	penumbra	and	just	ending	at	every	point	on	the
western	edge,	while	atthe	center	ofthe	penumbra,	onthe	path	of	total	eclipselaythe
shadow	ofthe	moon,	an	oval	patch	whose	greatest	diameter	was	butlittle	morethan	60
miles	in	length,	and	within	which	lay	every	part	of	the	earth	where	the	eclipse	was	total	at
that	moment.
the	position	of	the	penumbra	at	other	hours	is	also	shown	on	the	map,	although	with	more
distortion,	becauseitthen	meetsthe	surface	ofthe	earth	more	obliquely,	and	from	these
lines	it	is	easy	to	obtain	the	time	of	beginning	and	end	of	the	eclipse	at	any	desired	place,
and	to	estimate	by	the	distance	of	the	place	from	the	path	of	total	eclipse	how	much	of
the	sun’s	face	was	obscured.
let	the	student	make	these	“predictions”	for	washington,	chicago,	london,	and	algiers.
the	pointsinthe	map	marked	first	contact,	last	contact,	show	the	places	at	which	the
penumbral	cone	first	touched	the	earth	and	finally	left	it.	according	to	computations	made
asabasisfortheconstruction	ofthe	mapthe	greenwichtime	of	first	contact	was	0h.
12.5m.	and	of	last	contact	5h.	35.6m.,	and	the	difference	between	these	two	times	gives
the	total	duration	of	the	eclipse	upon	the	earth—i.	e.,	5	hours	23.1	minutes.
fig.	36.—central	eclipses	for	the	first	two	decades	of	the	twentieth	century.	oppolzer.
fig.	36.—central	eclipses	for	the	first	two	decades	of	the	twentieth	century.
oppolzer.
71.	futureeclipses.—aneclipsemapofadifferentkindisshowninfigwhich
represents	the	shadow	paths	of	all	the	central	eclipses	of	the	sun,	visible	during	the	period
1900-1918	a.	dinthosepartsoftheearthnorthofthesouthtemperatezoneeach
continuous	black	line	shows	the	path	of	the	shadow	in	a	total	eclipse,	from	its	beginning,
atsunriseatthe	westernend	ofthelinetoitsendsunsetattheeasternendthelittle
circle	near	the	middle	of	the	line	showing	the	place	at	which	the	eclipse	was	total	at	noon.
the	broken	lines	represent	similar	data	for	the	annular	eclipses.	this	map	is	one	of	a	series
preparedbythe	austrianastronomer,	oppolzershowingthepathofeverysucheclipse
from	the	year	1200	b.	c.	to	2160	a.	d.,	a	period	of	more	than	three	thousand	years.
if	we	examine	the	dates	of	the	eclipses	shown	in	this	map	we	shall	find	that	they	are	not
limitedtotheparticularseasons,	mayand	novemberin	whichthoseoftheyear1900
occurred,	but	are	scattered	through	all	the	months	of	the	year,	from	january	to	december.
this	shows	at	once	thatthe	line	of	nodes,	n’	n”,	of	fig.	34,	does	notremainin	afixed
position,	but	turns	round	in	the	plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit	so	that	in	different	years	the	earth
reachesthenodeindifferentmonthstheprecessionhasalreadyfurnishedusan
illustrationofasimilarchangetheslowrotationoftheearth’saxisproducinga
corresponding	shifting	of	the	line	in	which	the	planes	of	the	equator	and	ecliptic	intersect;
and	in	much	the	same	way,	through	the	disturbing	influence	of	the	sun’s	attraction,	the	line
n’	n”	is	made	to	revolve	westward,	opposite	to	the	arrowheads	in	fig.	34,	atthe	rate	of
nearly	20°	per	year,	so	that	the	earth	comes	to	each	node	about	19	days	earlier	in	each	year
than	in	the	year	preceding,	and	the	eclipse	season	in	each	year	comes	on	the	average	about
19	days	earlier	than	in	the	year	before,	although	there	is	a	good	deal	of	irregularity	in	the
amount	of	change	in	particular	years.
72.	recurrence	of	eclipses.—before	the	beginning	of	the	christian	era	astronomers	had
found	out	a	rough-and-ready	method	of	predicting	eclipses,	whichis	still	ofinterest	and
value.	the	substance	of	the	method	is	that	if	we	start	with	any	eclipse	whatever—e.	g.,	the
eclipse	of	may	28,	1900—and	reckon	forward	or	backward	from	that	date	a	period	of	18
yearsandordaysweshallfindanothereclipsequitesimilarinitsgeneral
characteristics	to	the	one	with	which	we	started.	thus,	from	the	map	of	eclipses	(fig.	36),
we	find	that	a	total	solar	eclipse	will	occur	on	june	8,	1918,	18	years	and	11	days	after	the
one	illustrated	in	fig.	35.	this	period	of	18	years	and	11	days	is	called	saros,	an	ancient
word	which	means	cycle	or	repetition,	and	since	every	eclipse	is	repeated	after	the	lapse	of
a	saros,	we	may	find	the	dates	of	all	the	eclipses	of	1918	by	adding	11	days	to	the	dates
giveninthetable	ofeclipsesforanditisto	beespecially	notedthateach
eclipse	of	1918	will	be	like	its	predecessor	of	1900	in	character—lunar,	solar,	partial,	total,
etctheeclipsesofanyyearmaybepredictedbyasimilarreferencetothosewhich
occurred	eighteen	years	earlier.	consult	a	file	of	old	almanacs.
the	exact	length	of	a	saros	is	223	lunar	months,	each	of	which	is	a	little	more	than	29.5
dayslong,	andif	we	multiplythe	exact	value	ofthislast	number(see	§	60)	by	223,	we
shall	find	for	the	product	6,585.32	days,	which	is	equal	to	18	years	11.32	days	when	there
arefourleap	yearsincludedinthe	18,	or	18	years	10.32	days	whenthe	number	ofleap
years	is	five;	and	in	applying	the	saros	to	the	prediction	of	eclipses,	due	heed	must	be	paid
to	the	number	of	intervening	leap	years.	to	explain	why	eclipses	are	repeated	at	the	end	of
thesaroswenotethattheoccurrenceofaneclipsedependssolelyupontherelative
positions	of	the	earth,	moon,	and	node	of	the	moon’s	orbit,	and	the	eclipse	will	be	repeated
as	often	as	these	three	come	back	to	the	position	which	first	produced	it.	this	happens	at
the	end	of	every	saros,	since	the	saros	is,	approximately,	the	least	common	multiple	of	the
length	ofthe	yearthelength	ofthelunar	month,	andthelength	oftime	required	bythe
line	of	nodes	to	make	a	complete	revolution	around	the	ecliptic.	if	the	saros	were	exactly	a
multiple	ofthese	three	periods,	every	eclipse	would	be	repeated	over	and	over	again	for
thousands	of	years;	but	such	is	not	the	casethe	saros	is	not	an	exact	multiple	of	a	year,
nor	is	it	an	exact	multiple	of	the	time	required	for	a	revolution	of	the	line	of	nodes,	and	in
consequence	the	restitution	which	comes	at	the	end	of	the	saros	is	not	a	perfect	one.	the
earth	at	the	223d	new	moon	is	in	fact	about	half	a	day’s	motion	farther	west,	relative	to	the
nodethanitwasatthebeginningandtheresultingeclipse,	whileverysimilarisnot
precisely	the	same	as	before.	after	another	18	years,	at	the	second	repetition,	the	earth	is	a
day	farther	from	the	node	than	at	first,	and	the	eclipse	differs	still	more	in	character,	etc.
this	is	shown	in	fig.	37,	which	representsthe	apparent	positions	ofthe	disks	ofthe	sun
and	moon	as	seen	from	the	center	ofthe	earth	atthe	end	of	each	sixth	saros,	108	years,
where	the	upper	row	of	figures	represents	the	number	of	repetitions	of	the	eclipse	from	the
beginning,	markedtotheendthesolareclipselimitsdaysarealso
shown,	and	all	those	eclipses	which	fall	between	the	10-day	limits	will	be	central	as	seen
fromsomepartoftheearththosebetweenandpartialwhereverseenwhile
betweenandtheymaybeeithertotalorpartialcomparethefigurewiththe
followingdescriptiongivenbyprofessornewcomb“aseriesofsucheclipses
commences	with	a	very	small	eclipse	near	one	pole	of	the	earth.	gradually	increasing	for
about	eleven	recurrences,	it	will	become	central	near	the	same	pole.	forty	or	more	central
eclipses	will	then	recur,	the	central	line	moving	slowly	toward	the	other	pole.	the	series
will	then	become	partial,	and	finally	cease.	the	entire	duration	of	the	series	will	be	more
thanathousandyearsanewseriescommencesontheaverageatintervalsofthirty
years.”
fig.	37.—graphical	illustration	of	the	saros.
fig.	37.—graphical	illustration	of	the	saros.
a	similar	figure	may	be	constructed	to	represent	the	recurrence	of	lunar	eclipses;	but	here,
inconsequenceofthesmallereclipselimitsweshallfindthataseriesisofshorter
durationalittleovereightcenturiesascomparedwithtwelvecenturieswhichisthe
average	duration	of	a	series	of	solar	eclipses.
onefurthermatterconnectedwiththesarosdeservesattentionduringtheperiodof
6,585.32	days	the	earth	has	6,585	times	turned	toward	the	sun	the	same	face	upon	which
the	moon’s	shadow	fell	at	the	beginning	of	the	saros,	but	at	the	end	of	the	saros	the	odd
0.32	of	a	day	gives	the	earth	time	to	make	about	a	third	of	a	revolution	more	before	the
eclipse	is	repeated,	and	in	consequence	the	eclipse	is	seen	in	a	different	region	of	the	earth,
ontheaverageaboutfarther	westinlongitude.	comparein	figtheregionsin
which	the	eclipses	of	1900	and	1918	are	visible.
is	this	change	in	the	region	where	the	repeated	eclipse	is	visible,	true	of	lunar	eclipses	as
well	as	solar?
73.	use	of	eclipses.—at	alltimes	and	among	all	peoples	eclipses,	and	particularlytotal
eclipses	of	the	sun,	have	been	reckoned	among	the	most	impressive	phenomena	of	nature.
inearlytimesandamonguncultivatedpeopletheywereusuallyregardedwith
apprehension,	often	amountingto	aterror	andfrenzy,	which	civilizedtravelers	have	not
scrupled	to	use	for	their	own	purposes	with	the	aid	of	the	eclipse	predictions	contained	in
their	almanacs,	threatening	at	the	proper	time	to	destroy	the	sun	or	moon,	and	pointing	to
theadvancingeclipseas	proofthattheirthreats	were	notvainin	our	own	dayand	our
own	land	these	feelings	of	awe	have	not	quite	disappeared,	but	for	the	most	part	eclipses
are	now	awaited	with	an	interest	and	pleasure	which,	contrasted	with	the	former	feelings
ofmankindfurnishoneofthemoststrikingillustrationsoftheeffectofscientific
knowledge	in	transforming	human	fear	and	misery	into	a	sense	of	security	and	enjoyment.
buttotheastronomeraneclipseis	morethanabeautifulillustrationofthe	workingof
naturallawsitisin	varying	degree	an	opportunity	of	addingto	hisstore	of	knowledge
respectingtheheavenlybodiestheregionimmediatelysurroundingthesunisat	most
times	closedtoresearch	bythe	blinding	glare	ofthe	sun’s	own	light,	sothat	a	planet	as
largeasthemoonmightexisthereunseenwereitnotfortheoccasionalopportunity
presentedbyatotaleclipse	whichshutsofftheexcessivelightandpermitsnotonlya
search	for	unknown	planets	but	for	anything	and	everything	which	may	exist	around	the
sun.	more	than	one	astronomer	has	reported	the	discovery	of	such	planets,	and	at	least	one
of	these	has	found	a	name	and	a	description	in	some	of	the	books,	but	at	the	present	time
most	astronomers	are	very	skeptical	about	the	existence	of	any	such	object	of	considerable
size,	althoughthereissome	reasonto	believethat	an	enormous	number	oflittle	bodies,
ranginginsizefrom	grainsofsandupwarddo	moveinthisregionasyetunseenand
offering	to	the	future	problems	for	investigation.
but	in	other	directions	the	study	of	this	region	at	the	times	of	total	eclipse	has	yielded	far
largerreturnsandinthechapteronthesunweshallhavetoconsiderthemarvelous
appearances	presented	by	the	solar	prominences	and	by	the	corona,	an	appendage	ofthe
sun	which	reaches	out	from	his	surface	for	millions	of	miles	but	is	never	seen	save	at	an
eclipsephotographsofthecoronaaretakenbyastronomersateveryopportunityand
reproductions	of	some	of	these	may	be	found	in	chapter	x.
annulareclipsesandlunareclipsesareofcomparativelylittleconsequencebutany
recorded	eclipse	may	become	of	value	in	connection	with	chronology.	we	date	our	letters
inaparticularyearofthetwentiethcenturyandcommonlysupposethattheyearsare
reckoned	from	the	birth	of	christ;	but	this	is	an	error,	for	the	eclipses	which	were	observed
of	old	and	by	the	chroniclers	have	been	associated	with	events	of	his	life,	when	examined
bytheastronomersarefoundquiteinconsistentwithastronomictheorytheyare,
however,	reconciled	with	it	if	we	assume	that	our	system	of	dates	has	its	origin	four	years
afterthebirthof	christorinother	wordsthat	christ	wasbornintheyear4	b.	c.	a
mistake	was	doubtless	made	at	the	time	the	christian	era	was	introduced	into	chronology.
at	many	otherpointsthechancerecord	ofaneclipseintheearlyannalsofcivilization
furnishes	a	similar	means	of	controlling	and	correcting	the	dates	assigned	by	the	historian
to	events	long	past.

chapter	viii
instruments	and	the	principles	involved	in	their	use
74.	twofamiliarinstruments.—inpreviouschapters	wehaveseenthataclockanda
dividedcircle(protractorareneededfortheobservations	whichanastronomer	makes,
and	it	is	worth	while	to	note	here	that	the	geography	of	the	sky	and	the	science	of	celestial
motionsdependfundamentallyuponthesetwoinstrumentstheprotractorisasimple
instrumentahumblememberofthefamilyofdividedcirclesbutuntoldlaborand
ingenuity	have	been	expended	on	this	family	to	make	possible	the	construction	of	a	circle
so	accurately	divided	that	with	it	angles	may	be	measured	to	the	tenth	of	a	second	instead
of	to	the	tenth	of	a	degree—i.	e.,	3,600	times	as	accurate	as	the	protractor	furnishes.
the	building	of	a	good	clock	is	equally	important	and	has	cost	a	like	amount	of	labor	and
pains,	so	that	it	is	a	far	cry	from	galileo	and	his	discovery	that	a	pendulum	“keeps	time”	to
the	modern	clock	with	its	accurate	construction	and	elaborate	provision	against	disturbing
influences	of	every	kind.	every	such	timepiece,	whether	it	be	of	the	nutmeg	variety	which
sellsforadollaror	whetheritbethestandardclock	ofagreatnationalobservatoryis
madeupofthesameessentialpartsthatfallnaturallyintofourclasses,	which	we	may
compare	with	the	departments	of	a	well-ordered	factory:	i.	a	timekeeping	department,	the
pendulum	or	balance	spring,	whose	oscillations	must	all	be	of	equal	duration.	ii.	a	power
departmentthe	weights	or	mainspring,	which,	when	woundstore	upthe	power	applied
from	outside	and	giveit	out	piecemeal	asrequiredto	keepthefirst	departmentrunning.
iii.	a	publication	departmentthe	dialand	hands,	which	give	outthetimefurnished	by
department	i.	iv.	a	transportation	department,	the	wheels,	which	connect	the	other	three
and	serve	as	a	means	oftransmitting	power	and	time	from	one	tothe	other.	the	case	of
either	clock	or	watch	is	merely	the	roof	which	shelters	it	and	forms	no	department	of	its
industry.	of	these	departments	the	first	is	by	far	the	most	important,	and	its	good	or	bad
performance	makes	or	mars	the	credit	of	the	clock.	beware	of	meddling	with	the	balance
wheel	of	your	watch.
75.	radiant	energy.—but	we	have	now	to	consider	otherinstruments	whichin	practice
supplementordisplacethesimpleapparatushithertoemployedamongthemost
importantofthesemoderninstrumentsarethetelescopethespectroscopeandthe
photographic	camera;	and	since	all	these	instruments	deal	with	the	light	which	comes	from
the	stars	to	the	earth,	we	must	for	their	proper	understanding	take	account	of	the	nature	of
that	light,	or,	more	strictly	speaking,	we	must	take	account	of	the	radiant	energy	emitted
by	the	sun	and	stars,	which	energy,	coming	from	the	sun,	is	translated	by	our	nerves	into
thetwo	different	sensations	oflight	and	heat.	the	radiant	energy	which	comes	from	the
starsisnotfundamentallydifferentfromthatofthesunbuttheamountofenergy
furnishedbyanystarissosmallthatitisunabletoproducethroughournervesany
sensible	perception	of	heat,	and	for	the	same	reason	the	vast	majority	of	stars	are	invisible
tothe	unaided	eyethey	do	notfurnish	a	sufficient	amount	of	energyto	affectthe	optic
nerves.	a	hot	brick	taken	into	the	hand	reveals	its	presence	by	the	two	different	sensations
of	heat	and	pressure	(weight);	but	as	there	is	only	one	brick	to	produce	the	two	sensations,
sothereisonly	oneenergyto	producethroughitsaction	upon	differentnervesthetwo
sensations	of	light	and	heat,	and	this	energy	is	called	radiant	because	it	appears	to	stream
forth	radially	from	everything	which	has	the	capacity	of	emitting	it.	for	the	detailed	study
of	radiant	energy	the	student	is	referred	to	that	branch	of	science	called	physics;	but	some
ofitselementaryprinciplesmaybelearnedthroughthefollowingsimpleexperiment,
which	the	student	should	not	fail	to	perform	for	himself:
drop	a	bullet	or	other	similar	object	into	a	bucket	of	water	and	observe	the	circular	waves
which	spread	from	the	place	where	it	enters	the	water.	these	waves	are	a	form	of	radiant
energy,	but	differing	from	light	or	heat	in	that	they	are	visibly	confined	to	a	single	plane,
the	surface	of	the	water,	instead	of	filling	the	entire	surrounding	space.	by	varying	the	size
ofthebucketthedepthofthewatertheweightofthebulletetcdifferentkindsof
waves,	big	and	little,	may	be	produced;	but	every	such	set	of	waves	may	be	described	and
definedinallitsprincipalcharacteristicsby	meansofthreenumbers—vizthevertical
height	of	the	waves	from	hollow	to	crest;	the	distance	of	one	wave	from	the	next;	and	the
velocity	with	which	the	waves	travel	across	the	water.	the	last	of	these	quantities	is	called
the	velocity	of	propagationthe	second	is	calledthe	wave	length;	one	half	ofthe	firstis
called	the	amplitude;	and	all	these	terms	find	important	applications	in	the	theory	of	light
and	heat.
the	energy	of	the	falling	bullet,	the	disturbance	which	it	produced	on	entering	the	water,
was	carried	by	the	waves	from	the	center	to	the	edge	of	the	bucket	but	not	beyond,	for	the
wave	can	go	only	so	far	as	the	water	extends.	the	transfer	of	energy	in	this	way	requires	a
perfectly	continuous	medium	through	which	the	waves	may	travel,	and	the	whole	visible
universe	is	supposed	to	be	filled	with	something	called	ether,	which	serves	everywhere	as
a	medium	for	the	transmission	of	radiant	energy	just	as	the	water	in	the	experiment	served
as	a	medium	for	transmitting	in	waves	the	energy	furnished	to	it	by	the	falling	bullet.	the
student	may	think	of	this	energy	as	being	transmitted	in	spherical	waves	through	the	ether,
every	glowing	body,	such	as	a	star,	a	candle	flame,	an	arc	lamp,	a	hot	coal,	etc.,	being	the
originandcenterofsuchsystemsofwavesanddeterminingbyitsownphysicaland
chemical	properties	the	wave	length	and	amplitude	of	the	wave	systems	given	off.
the	intensity	of	any	light	depends	upon	the	amplitude	of	the	corresponding	vibration,	and
itscolordependsuponthe	wavelengthbyingeniousdevices	whichneednotbehere
described	it	has	been	found	possible	to	measure	the	wave	length	corresponding	to	different
colors—e.	g.,	all	of	the	colors	of	the	rainbow,	and	some	of	these	wave	lengths	expressed	in
tenth	meters	are	as	follows:	a	tenth	meter	is	the	length	obtained	by	dividing	a	meter	into
1010	equal	parts.	1010	=	10,000,000,000.
colorwave	length.
extremelimitof	visible	violet3,900
middleof	thevioletbluegreenyelloworangered7,000
extremelimitof	visible	red7,600
plate	i.	the	northern	constellations
plate	i.	the	northern	constellations
the	phrase	“extreme	limit	of	visible	violet”	or	red	used	above	must	be	understood	to	mean
that	in	general	the	eye	is	not	able	to	detect	radiant	energy	having	a	wave	length	less	than
3,900	or	greater	than	7,600	tenth	meters.	radiant	energy,	however,	exists	in	waves	of	both
greater	and	shorterlengththanthe	above,	and	may	bereadily	detected	by	apparatus	not
subject	to	the	limitations	of	the	human	eye—e.	g.,	a	common	thermometer	will	show	a	rise
oftemperature	whenitsbulbisexposedtoradiantenergy	of	wavelength	much	greater
than	7,600	tenth	meters,	and	a	photographic	plate	will	be	strongly	affected	by	energy	of
shorter	wave	length	than	3,900	tenth	meters.
76.	reflection	and	condensation	of	waves.—whenthe	waves	produced	by	dropping	a
bullet	into	a	bucket	of	water	meet	the	sides	of	the	bucket,	they	appear	to	rebound	and	are
reflected	backtowardthe	center,	andifthe	bulletis	dropped	very	nearthe	center	ofthe
bucketthereflected	waves	will	meetsimultaneouslyatthispointandproducethereby
theircombinedactionawavehigherthanthatwhichwasreflectedatthewallsofthe
buckettherehasbeenacondensationofenergyproducedbythereflectionandthis
increased	energy	is	shown	by	the	greater	amplitude	ofthe	wave.	the	student	should	not
fail	to	notice	that	each	portion	of	the	wave	has	traveled	out	and	back	over	the	radius	of	the
bucketandthatthey	meetsimultaneouslyatthecenterbecauseofthisequalityofthe
pathsover	whichtheytravelandtheresultingequalityoftimerequiredtogooutand
backifthebulletweredroppedatonesideofthecenterwouldthereflectedwaves
produce	at	any	point	a	condensation	of	energy?
if	the	bucket	were	of	elliptical	instead	of	circular	cross	section	and	the	bullet	were	dropped
at	one	focus	of	the	ellipse	there	would	be	produced	a	condensation	of	reflected	energy	at
the	other	focus,	since	the	sum	ofthe	paths	traversed	by	each	portion	ofthe	wave	before
and	after	reflection	is	equal	to	the	sum	of	the	paths	traversed	by	every	other	portion,	and
allpartsofthe	wavereachthesecondfocusatthesametime.	upon	whatgeometrical
principle	does	this	depend?
the	condensation	of	wave	energyinthe	circular	and	elliptical	buckets	arespecialcases
under	the	general	principle	that	such	a	condensation	will	be	produced	at	any	point	which	is
soplacedthatdifferentpartsofthewavefrontreachitsimultaneouslywhetherby
reflection	or	by	some	other	means,	as	shown	below.
the	student	will	note	that	for	the	sake	of	greater	precision	we	here	say	wave	front	instead
of	wave.	if	in	any	wave	we	imagine	a	line	drawn	along	the	crest,	so	as	to	touch	every	drop
which	at	that	moment	is	exactly	at	the	crest,	we	shall	have	what	is	called	a	wave	front,	and
similarly	a	line	drawn	through	the	trough	between	two	waves,	or	through	any	set	of	drops
similarly	placed	on	a	wave,	constitutes	a	wave	front.
77.	mirrors	andlenses.—thatform	ofradiant	energy	which	we	recognize	aslight	and
heat	may	be	reflected	and	condensed	precisely	as	arethe	waves	of	waterinthe	exercise
considered	above,	but	owing	to	the	extreme	shortness	of	the	wave	length	in	this	case	the
reflecting	surface	should	be	very	smooth	and	highly	polished.	a	piece	of	glass	hollowed
out	in	the	center	by	grinding,	and	with	a	light	film	of	silver	chemically	deposited	upon	the
hollow	surface	and	carefully	polished,	is	often	used	by	astronomers	for	this	purpose,	and
is	called	a	concave	mirror.
the	radiant	energy	coming	from	a	star	or	other	distant	object	and	falling	upon	the	silvered
face	of	such	a	mirroris	reflected	and	condensed	at	a	point	alittlein	front	ofthe	mirror,
and	there	forms	an	image	of	the	star,	which	may	be	seen	with	the	unaided	eye,	if	it	is	held
in	the	right	place,	or	may	be	examined	through	a	magnifying	glass.	similarly,	an	image	of
the	sun,	a	planet,	or	a	distant	terrestrial	object	is	formed	by	the	mirror,	which	condenses	at
itsappropriateplacetheradiantenergyproceedingfromeachandeverypointinthe
surface	of	the	object,	and	this,	in	common	phrase,	produces	an	image	of	the	object.
anotherdevicemorefrequentlyusedbyastronomersfortheproductionofimages
(condensationofenergyisalens	whichinitssimplestformisaround	pieceofglass,
thick	in	the	center	and	thin	atthe	edge,	with	a	cross	section,	such	as	is	shown	at	a	bin
fig.	38.	if	we	suppose	e	g	d	to	represent	a	small	part	of	a	wave	front	coming	from	a	very
distant	source	of	radiant	energy,	such	as	a	star,	this	wave	front	will	be	practically	a	plane
surface	represented	bythe	straightline	e	d,	butin	passingthroughthelensthis	surface
will	become	warped,	since	light	travels	slower	in	glass	than	in	air,	and	the	central	part	of
the	beam,	ginits	onward	motion	will	be	retarded	by	the	thick	center	ofthe	lens,	more
than	e	or	d	will	be	retarded	by	the	comparatively	thin	outer	edges	of	a	b.	on	the	right	of
thelensthe	wavefronttherefore	will	betransformedinto	a	curved	surface	whose	exact
character	depends	upon	the	shape	of	the	lens	and	the	kind	of	glass	of	which	it	is	made.	by
properlychoosingthesethe	new	wavefront	may	be	madea	partofasphere	havingits
centeratthepointfandthewholeenergyofthewavefrontegdwillthenbe
condensed	at	fbecausethispointisequallydistantfrom	allpartsofthe	warped	wave
front,	and	therefore	is	in	a	position	to	receive	them	simultaneously.	the	distance	of	f	from
a	b	is	called	the	focal	length	of	the	lens,	and	f	itself	is	called	the	focus.	the	significance
of	this	last	word	(latin,	focus	=	fireplace)	will	become	painfully	apparent	to	the	student	if
he	will	hold	a	common	reading	glass	between	his	hand	and	the	sun	in	such	a	way	that	the
focus	falls	upon	his	hand.
fig.	38.—illustrating	the	theory	of	lenses.
fig.	38.—illustrating	the	theory	of	lenses.
alltheenergytransmitted	bythelensinthe	direction	g	fisconcentrated	upon	a	very
small	area	at	f,	and	an	image	of	the	object—e.	g.,	a	star,	from	which	the	light	came—is
formed	here.	otherstarssituated	nearthe	onein	question	willalsosend	beams	oflight
along	slightly	different	directionstothelens,	andthese	will	be	concentrated,	eachinits
appropriate	placein	thefocal	plane,	f	h,	passedthroughthe	focus,	f,	perpendicularto
theline,	f	g,	and	weshallfindinthisplaneapictureofallthestarsorotherobjects
within	the	range	of	the	lens.
fig.	39.—essential	parts	of	a	reflecting	telescope.	fig.	39.—essential	parts	of	a
reflecting	telescope.
78.	telescopes.—the	simplest	kind	of	telescope	consists	of	a	concave	mirror	to	produce
images,	and	a	magnifying	glass,	called	an	eyepiece,	through	which	to	examine	them;	but
for	convenience’	sake,	so	that	the	observer	may	not	stand	in	his	own	light,	a	small	mirror
is	frequently	added	to	this	combination,	as	at	h	in	fig.	39,	wherethelinesrepresentthe
directions	along	which	the	energy	is	propagated.	by	reflection	from	this	mirror	the	focal
plane	and	the	images	are	shifted	to	f,	where	they	may	be	examined	from	one	side	through
the	magnifying	glass	e.
such	a	combination	of	parts	is	called	a	reflecting	telescope,	while	one	in	which	the	images
areproducedbyalensorcombinationoflensesiscalledarefractingtelescopethe
adjectivehavingreferencetothebendingrefractionproducedbytheglassuponthe
direction	in	which	the	energy	is	propagated.	the	customary	arrangement	of	parts	in	such	a
telescope	is	shown	in	fig.	40,	where	the	part	marked	o	is	called	the	objective	and	v	e	(the
magnifying	glass)	is	the	eyepiece,	or	ocular,	as	it	is	sometimes	called.
fig.	40.—a	simple	form	of	refracting	telescope.
fig.	40.—a	simple	form	of	refracting	telescope.
most	objects	with	which	we	have	to	deal	in	using	a	telescope	send	to	it	not	light	of	one
color	only,	but	a	mixture	oflight	of	many	colors,	many	different	wavelengths,	some	of
which	are	refracted	more	than	others	by	the	glass	of	which	the	lens	is	composed,	and	in
consequence	of	these	different	amounts	of	refraction	a	single	lens	does	not	furnish	a	single
imageofastarbutgivesaconfusedjumbleofredandyellowandblueimages	much
inferior	in	sharpness	of	outline	(definition)	to	the	images	made	by	a	good	concave	mirror.
to	remedy	this	defect	it	is	customary	to	make	the	objective	of	two	or	more	pieces	of	glass
of	different	densities	and	ground	to	different	shapes	as	is	shown	at	o	in	fig.	40.	the	two
pieces	of	glass	thus	mounted	in	one	frame	constitute	a	compound	lens	having	its	own	focal
plane,	shown	at	finthe	figure,	and	similarlythelenses	composingthe	eyepiece	have	a
focal	plane	between	the	eyepiece	and	the	objective	which	must	also	fall	at	f,	andinthe
use	ofatelescopetheeyepiece	mustbe	pushed	outorin	untilitsfocalplanecoincides
with	that	of	the	objective.	this	process,	which	is	called	focusing,	is	what	is	accomplished
in	the	ordinary	opera	glass	by	turning	a	screw	placed	between	the	two	tubes,	and	it	must
be	carefully	done	with	every	telescope	in	order	to	obtain	distinct	vision.
79.	magnifyingpower.—theamountbywhichagiventelescopemagnifiesdepends
upon	the	focal	length	of	the	objective	(or	mirror)	and	the	focal	length	of	the	eyepiece,	and
is	equal	to	the	ratio	of	these	two	quantities.	thus	in	fig.	40	the	distance	of	the	objective
from	the	focal	plane	f	is	about	16	times	as	great	as	the	distance	of	the	eyepiece	from	the
sameplaneandthemagnifyingpowerofthistelescopeisthereforediametersa
magnifyingpowerofdiametersmeansthatthediameterofanyobjectseeninthe
telescopelookstimesaslargeasitappearswithoutthetelescopeandisnearly
equivalentto	saying	thatthe	object	appears	only	one	sixteenth	as	far	off.	sometimes	the
magnifying	power	is	assumed	to	be	the	number	of	times	that	the	area	of	an	object	seems
increased;	and	since	areas	are	proportional	to	the	squares	of	lines,	the	magnifying	power
of	16	diameters	might	be	called	a	power	of	256.	everylargetelescopeis	provided	with
several	eyepieces	of	different	focal	lengths,	ranging	from	a	quarter	of	an	inch	to	two	and	a
half	inches,	which	are	used	to	furnish	different	magnifying	powers	as	may	be	required	for
the	differentkinds	of	work	undertaken	withtheinstrument.	higherpowerscan	be	used
with	large	telescopes	than	with	small	ones,	but	it	is	seldom	advantageous	to	use	with	any
telescope	an	eyepiece	giving	a	higher	power	than	60	diameters	for	each	inch	of	diameter
of	the	objective.
thepartplayedbytheeyepieceindeterminingmagnifyingpowerwillbereadily
understood	from	the	following	experiment:
make	a	pin	hole	in	a	piece	of	cardboard.	bring	a	printed	page	so	close	to	one	eye	that	you
can	no	longer	see	the	letters	distinctly,	and	then	place	the	pin	hole	between	the	eye	and	the
page.	the	letters	which	were	before	blurred	may	now	be	seen	plainly	through	the	pin	hole,
even	when	the	page	is	brought	nearer	to	the	eye	than	before.	as	it	is	brought	nearer,	notice
howthelettersseemto	becomelargersolely	becausethey	are	nearer.	a	pin	holeisthe
simplest	kind	of	a	magnifier,	and	the	eyepiece	in	a	telescope	plays	the	same	part	as	does
the	pin	hole	in	the	experiment;	it	enables	the	eye	to	be	brought	nearer	to	the	image,	and	the
shorter	the	focal	length	of	the	eyepiece	the	nearer	is	the	eye	brought	to	the	image	and	the
higher	is	the	magnifying	power.
fig.	41.—a	simple	equatorial	mounting.	fig.	41.—a	simple	equatorial	mounting.
80.	the	equatorial	mounting.—telescopes	are	of	all	sizes,	from	the	modest	opera	glass
which	may	be	carried	in	the	pocket	and	which	requires	no	other	support	than	the	hand,	to
the	giant	which	must	have	a	special	roof	to	shelter	it	and	elaborate	machinery	to	support
and	direct	it	toward	the	sky.	but	for	even	the	largest	telescopes	this	machinery	consists	of
thefollowingpartswhichareillustratedwithexceptionofthelastoneinthesmall
equatorial	telescope	shown	in	figitis	not	customaryto	place	a	driving	clock	on	so
small	a	telescope	as	this:
(a)	a	supporting	pier	or	tripod.
(b)	an	axis	placed	parallel	to	the	axis	of	the	earth.
(c)	another	axis	at	right	angles	to	b	and	capable	of	revolving	upon	b	as	an	axle.
(d)	the	telescope	tube	attached	to	c	and	capable	of	revolving	about	c.
(e)	graduated	circles	attached	to	c	and	b	to	measure	the	amount	by	which	the	telescope	is
turned	on	these	axes.
(f)	adrivingclocksoconnected	withbasto	makec(and	drevolveabout	bwithan
angular	velocity	equal	and	opposite	to	that	with	which	the	earth	turns	upon	its	axis.
suchasupportiscalledanequatorial	mountingandthestudentshouldnotefromthe
figure	that	the	circles,	e,	measure	the	hour	angle	and	declination	of	any	star	toward	which
thetelescopeisdirectedandconverselyifthetelescopebesosetthatthesecircles
indicatethehourangleanddeclinationofanygivenstarthetelescope	willthenpoint
toward	that	star.	in	this	way	it	is	easy	to	find	with	the	telescope	any	moderately	bright	star,
eveninbroaddaylightalthoughitisthenabsolutelyinvisibletothenakedeyethe
rotation	of	the	earth	about	its	axis	will	speedily	carry	the	telescope	away	from	the	star,	but
if	the	driving	clock	be	started,	its	effect	is	to	turn	the	telescope	toward	the	west	just	as	fast
astheearth’srotationcarriesittowardtheeastandbythesecompensating	motionsto
keepitdirectedtowardthestarin	fig.	42,	whichrepresentsthelargestandoneofthe
mostperfectrefractingtelescopeseverbuiltletthestudentpickoutandidentifythe
several	parts	ofthe	mounting	above	described.	a	part	ofthe	driving	clock	may	beseen
within	the	head	of	the	pier.	in	fig.	43	trace	out	the	corresponding	parts	in	the	mounting	of
a	reflecting	telescope.
fig.	42.—equatorial	mounting	of	the	great	telescope	of	the	yerkes	observatory.
fig.	42.—equatorial	mounting	of	the	great	telescope	of	the	yerkes	observatory.
fig.	43.—the	reflecting	telescope	of	the	paris	observatory.	fig.	43.—the	reflecting
telescope	of	the	paris	observatory.
a	telescope	is	often	only	a	subordinate	part	of	some	instrument	or	apparatus,	and	then	its
styleof	mountingisdeterminedbytherequirementsofthespecialcasebutwhenthe
telescopeisthechiefthingandtheremainderoftheapparatusissubordinatetoitthe
equatorial	mounting	is	almost	always	adopted,	although	sometimes	the	arrangement	of	the
partsisverydifferentinappearancefromanyofthoseshownabovebewareofthe
popular	error	that	an	object	held	close	in	front	of	a	telescope	can	be	seen	by	an	observer	at
theeyepiecethenumerousstoriesofastronomerswhosawspiderscrawlingoverthe
objective	of	their	telescope,	and	imagined	they	were	beholding	strange	objects	in	the	sky,
are	all	fictitious,	since	nothing	on	or	near	the	objective	could	possibly	be	seen	through	the
telescope.
81.	photography.—a	photographic	camera	consists	of	a	lens	and	a	device	for	holding	at
its	focus	a	specially	prepared	plate	or	film.	this	plate	carries	a	chemical	deposit	which	is
very	sensitive	to	the	action	of	light,	and	which	may	be	made	to	preserve	the	imprint	of	any
picture	which	the	lens	forms	upon	it.	if	such	a	sensitive	plate	is	placed	atthe	focus	of	a
reflectingtelescopethecombinationbecomesacameraavailableforastronomical
photographyandatthepresenttimethetendencyisstronginnearlyeverybranchof
astronomicalresearchtosubstitutethesensitiveplateinplaceoftheobserverata
telescope.	arefractingtelescope	may	also	be	usedfor	astronomical	photography,	andis
very	much	used,	butsome	complications	occur	here	on	account	oftheresolution	ofthe
lightintoitsconstituentcolorsinpassingthroughtheobjectivefigshowssucha
telescope,	or	rather	two	telescopes,	one	photographic,	the	other	visual,	supported	side	by
side	upon	the	same	equatorial	mounting.
fig.	44.—photographic	telescope	of	the	paris	observatory.	fig.	44.—photographic
telescope	of	the	paris	observatory.
one	of	the	great	advantages	of	photography	is	found	in	connection	with	what	is	calledpersonalequation.—itisaremarkablefactfirstinvestigatedbythegerman
astronomerbesselthreequartersofacenturyagothatwhereextremeaccuracyis
required	the	human	senses	can	not	be	implicitly	relied	upon.	the	most	skillful	observers
will	not	agree	exactly	in	their	measurement	of	an	angle	or	in	estimating	the	exact	instant	at
which	a	star	crossed	the	meridian;	the	most	skillful	artists	can	not	draw	identical	pictures
of	the	same	object,	etc.
these	minor	deceptions	of	the	senses	are	included	in	the	term	personal	equation,	which	is
a	famous	phrase	in	astronomy,	denoting	that	the	observations	of	any	given	person	require
to	be	corrected	by	means	of	some	equation	involving	his	personality.
general	health,	digestion,	nerves,	fatigue,	all	influence	the	personal	equation,	and	it	was	in
reference	to	such	matters	that	one	of	the	most	eminent	of	living	astronomers	has	given	this
description	of	his	habits	of	observing:
“in	order	to	avoid	every	physiological	disturbance,	i	have	adopted	the	rule	to	abstain	for
one	or	two	hours	before	commencing	observations	from	every	laborious	occupation;	never
to	gotothetelescope	with	stomachloaded	with	foodto	abstain	from	everything	which
could	affect	the	nervous	system,	from	narcotics	and	alcohol,	and	especially	from	the	abuse
ofcoffeewhichihavefoundtobeexceedinglyprejudicialtotheaccuracyof
observation.”[c]	a	regimen	suggestive	of	preparation	for	an	athletic	contest	rather	than	for
the	more	quiet	labors	of	an	astronomer.
83.	visualandphotographicwork.—thephotographicplatehasnostomachandno
nervesandisthusfreefrommanyofthesourcesoferrorwhichinhereinvisual
observations,	and	in	special	classes	of	work	it	possesses	other	marked	advantages,	such	as
rapidity	when	many	stars	are	to	be	dealt	with	simultaneously,	permanence	of	record,	and
owing	to	the	cumulative	effect	oflong	exposure	ofthe	plateitis	possible	to	photograph
with	a	given	telescope	stars	far	too	faint	to	be	seen	through	it.	on	the	other	hand,	the	eye
has	the	advantage	in	some	respects,	such	as	studying	the	minute	details	of	a	fairly	bright
object—egthesurfaceofaplanetorthesun’scoronaandforthepresentatleast,
neither	method	of	observing	can	exclude	the	other.	for	a	remarkable	case	of	discordance
betweentheresults	of	photographic	and	visual	observations	comparethe	pictures	ofthe
great	nebulainthe	constellation	andromeda,	which	are	given	in	chapter	xiv.	a	partial
explanation	ofthese	discordances	and	other	similar	onesisthatthe	eyeis	most	strongly
affected	by	greenish-yellow	light,	while	the	photographic	plate	responds	most	strongly	to
violet	light;	the	photograph,	therefore,	represents	things	which	the	eye	has	little	capacity
for	seeing,	and	vice	versa.
84.	the	spectroscope.—in	some	respects	the	spectroscope	is	the	exact	counterpart	of	the
telescope.	the	latter	condenses	radiant	energy	and	the	former	disperses	it.	as	a	measuring
instrument	the	telescope	is	mainly	concerned	with	the	direction	from	which	light	comes,
and	the	different	colors	of	which	that	light	is	composed	affect	it	only	as	an	obstacle	to	be
overcome	in	its	construction.	on	the	other	hand,	with	the	spectroscope	the	direction	from
whichtheradiantenergycomesisofminorconsequenceandtheall-important
considerationistheintrinsiccharacterofthatradiation.	whatcolorsarepresentinthe
light	and	in	what	proportions?	what	can	these	colors	be	made	to	tell	about	the	nature	and
condition	of	the	body	from	which	they	come,	be	it	sun,	or	star,	or	some	terrestrial	source
of	light,	such	as	an	arc	lamp,	a	candle	flame,	or	a	furnace	in	blast?	these	are	some	of	the
characteristic	questions	of	the	spectrum	analysis,	and,	as	the	name	implies,	they	are	solved
by	analyzing	the	radiant	energy	into	its	component	parts,	setting	down	the	blue	light	in	one
placetheyellowinanothertheredinstillanotheretcandinterpretingthisarrayof
colors	by	means	of	principles	which	we	shall	have	to	consider.	something	of	this	process
of	color	analysis	may	be	seeninthe	brilliant	hues	shown	by	a	soap	bubble,	orreflected
fromapieceofmother-of-pearlandstillmorestrikinglyexhibitedintherainbow,
produced	by	raindrops	which	break	up	the	sunlight	into	its	component	colors	and	arrange
themeachinitsappropriateplace.	anyofthesenatural	methodsofdecomposinglight
might	be	employed	in	the	construction	of	a	spectroscope,	but	in	spectroscopes	which	are
used	for	analyzing	the	light	from	feeble	sources,	such	as	a	star,	or	a	candle	flame,	a	glass
prismoftriangularcrosssectionisusuallyemployedtoresolvethelightintoits
componentcolorswhichitdoesbyrefractingitasshownattheedgesofthelensin
fig.	38.
fig.	45.—resolution	of	light	into	its	component	colors.
fig.	45.—resolution	of	light	into	its	component	colors.
the	course	of	a	beam	of	light	in	passing	through	such	a	prism	is	shown	in	fig.	45.	note
that	the	bending	of	the	light	from	its	original	course	into	a	new	one,	which	is	here	shown
as	produced	by	the	prism,	is	quite	similar	to	the	bending	shown	at	the	edges	of	a	lens	and
comes	from	the	same	causethe	slower	velocity	oflightin	glassthanin	airittakesthe
light-waves	as	long	to	move	over	the	path	a	b	in	glass	as	over	the	longer	path	1,	2,	3,	4,	of
which	only	the	middle	section	lies	in	the	glass.
not	only	does	the	prism	bend	the	beam	of	light	transmitted	by	it,	but	it	bends	in	different
degree	light	of	different	colors,	as	is	shown	in	the	figure,	where	the	beam	at	the	left	of	the
prism	is	supposed	to	be	made	up	of	a	mixture	of	blue	and	red	light,	while	at	the	right	of
the	prism	the	greater	deviation	imparted	to	the	blue	quite	separates	the	colors,	so	that	they
fall	at	different	places	on	the	screen,	s	s.	the	compound	light	has	been	analyzed	into	its
constituents,	and	in	the	same	way	every	other	color	would	be	put	down	at	its	appropriate
place	on	the	screen,	and	a	beam	of	white	light	falling	upon	the	prism	would	be	resolved	by
it	into	a	sequence	of	colors,	falling	upon	the	screen	in	the	order	red,	orange,	yellow,	green,
blueindigoviolettheinitiallettersofthesenames	maketheword	roygbivandby
means	of	it	their	order	is	easily	remembered.
fig.	46.—principal	parts	of	a	spectroscope.
fig.	46.—principal	parts	of	a	spectroscope.
if	the	light	which	is	to	be	examined	comes	from	a	star	the	analysis	made	by	the	prism	is
complete,	and	when	viewed	through	a	telescope	the	image	of	the	star	is	seen	to	be	drawn
out	into	a	band	of	light,	which	is	called	a	spectrum,	and	is	red	at	one	end	and	violet	or	blue
at	the	other,	with	all	the	colors	of	the	rainbow	intervening	in	proper	order	between	these
extremes.	such	a	prism	placed	in	front	of	the	objective	of	a	telescope	is	called	an	objective
prismandhasbeenusedforstellar	work	with	markedsuccessatthe	harvard	college
observatory.	but	if	the	light	to	be	analyzed	comes	from	an	object	having	an	appreciable
extent	of	surface,	such	as	the	sun	or	a	planet,	the	objective	prism	can	not	be	successfully
employed,	since	each	point	ofthe	surface	will	produceits	own	spectrum,	andthese	will
appearintheviewtelescopesuperposedandconfusedonewithanotherinavery
objectionable	manner.	to	avoidthis	difficultythereis	placed	betweenthe	prism	andthe
source	of	light	an	opaque	screen,	s,	with	a	very	narrow	slit	cut	in	it,	through	which	all	the
light	to	be	analyzed	must	pass	and	must	also	go	through	a	lens,	a,	placed	between	the	slit
and	the	prism,	as	shown	in	fig.	46.	the	slit	and	lens,	together	with	the	tube	in	which	they
areusuallysupportedarecalledacollimator.	bythisdeviceaverylimitedamountof
light	is	permitted	to	pass	from	the	object	through	the	slit	and	lens	to	the	prism	and	is	there
resolvedintoaspectrumwhichisineffectaseriesofimagesoftheslitinlightof
different	colors,	placed	side	by	side	so	close	as	to	make	practically	a	continuous	ribbon	of
light	whose	widthisthelengthofeachindividualpictureoftheslitthelengthofthe
ribbon	(dispersion)	depends	mainly	upon	the	shape	of	the	prism	and	the	kind	of	glass	of
whichitismadeanditmaybeverygreatlyincreasedandtheefficiencyofthe
spectroscopeenhanced	by	puttingtwothreeor	more	prismsinplace	ofthesingleone
above	described.	when	the	amount	oflightis	very	great,	asin	the	case	ofthe	sun	or	an
electric	arc	lamp,	it	is	advantageous	to	alter	slightly	the	arrangement	of	the	spectroscope
andtosubstituteinplaceoftheprismagrating—ieametallicmirrorwithagreat
number	of	fine	parallel	lines	ruled	upon	its	surface	at	equal	intervals,	one	from	another.	it
isbyvirtueofsuchasystemoffineparallelgroovesthatmother-of-pearldisplaysits
beautifulcoloreffectsandabrilliantspectrumofgreatpurityandhighdispersionis
furnishedbyagratingruledwithfromtolinestotheinchfig47
representsrathercrudelyapartofthespectrumofanarclightfurnishedbysucha
gratingorratheritshowsthreedifferentspectraarrangedsidebysideandlooking
somethinglikearudeladderthesidesoftheladderarethespectrafurnishedbythe
incandescent	carbons	of	the	lamp,	and	the	cross	pieces	are	the	spectrum	of	the	electric	arc
fillingthe	space	betweenthe	carbons.	figshows	a	continuation	ofthesame	spectra
intoaregionwheretheradiantenergyisinvisibletotheeyebutiscapableofbeing
photographed.
fig.	47.—green	and	blue	part	of	the	spectrum	of	an	electric	arc	light.
fig.	47.—green	and	blue	part	of	the	spectrum	of	an	electric	arc	light.
it	is	only	when	a	lens	is	placed	between	the	lamp	and	the	slit	of	the	spectroscope	that	the
three	spectra	are	shown	distinct	from	each	other	as	in	the	figure.	the	purpose	of	the	lens	is
to	make	a	picture	ofthelamp	upontheslitsothat	alltheradiant	energyfrom	any	one
point	ofthearc	may	be	broughtto	one	partoftheslitandthusappearintheresulting
spectrum	separated	from	the	energy	which	comes	from	every	other	part	of	the	arc.	such	an
instrumentiscalledananalyzingspectroscopewhileonewithoutthelensiscalledan
integrating	spectroscope,	since	it	furnishes	to	each	point	of	the	slit	a	sample	of	the	radiant
energy	coming	from	every	part	of	the	source	of	light,	and	thus	produces	only	an	average
spectrum	of	that	source	without	distinction	of	its	parts.	when	a	spectroscope	is	attached	to
a	telescope,	as	is	often	done	(see	fig.	49),	the	eyepiece	is	removed	to	make	way	for	it,	and
thetelescopeobjectivetakesthepartoftheanalyzinglensacameraisfrequently
combined	withsuchanapparatustophotographthespectraitfurnishesandthe	whole
instrument	is	then	called	a	spectrograph.
fig.	48.—violet	and	ultraviolet	parts	of	spectrum	of	an	arc	lamp.
fig.	48.—violet	and	ultraviolet	parts	of	spectrum	of	an	arc	lamp.
85.	spectrum	analysis.—having	seenthe	mechanism	ofthe	spectroscope	by	whichthe
lightincident	upon	itisresolved	intoits	constituent	parts	and	drawn	outinto	a	series	of
colorsarrangedintheorderoftheirwavelengthswehavenowtoconsiderthe
interpretation	which	is	to	be	placed	upon	the	various	kinds	of	spectra	which	may	be	seen,
and	here	we	rely	upon	the	experience	of	physicists	and	chemists,	from	whom	we	learn	as
follows:
fig.	49.—a	spectroscope	attached	to	the	yerkes	telescope.
fig.	49.—a	spectroscope	attached	to	the	yerkes	telescope.
the	radiant	energy	which	is	analyzed	by	the	spectroscope	has	its	source	in	the	atoms	and
molecules	which	make	up	the	luminous	body	from	which	the	energy	is	radiated,	and	these
atoms	and	molecules	are	able	to	impress	upon	the	ether	their	own	peculiarities	in	the	shape
of	waves	of	different	length	and	amplitude.	we	have	seen	that	by	varying	the	conditions	of
the	experiment	different	kinds	of	waves	may	be	produced	in	a	bucket	of	water;	and	as	a
study	of	these	waves	might	furnish	an	index	to	the	conditions	which	produced	them,	so	the
study	of	the	waves	peculiar	to	the	light	which	comes	from	any	source	may	be	made	to	give
information	aboutthe	molecules	which	make	up	that	source.	thus	the	molecules	ofiron
produce	a	system	of	waves	peculiar	to	themselves	and	which	can	be	duplicated	by	nothing
elseandeveryothersubstancegivesoffitsownpeculiartypeofenergypresentinga
limited	and	definite	number	of	wave	lengths	dependent	upon	the	nature	and	condition	of
its	moleculesifthese	moleculesarefreetobehaveintheirowncharacteristicfashion
without	disturbance	or	crowding,	they	emit	light	of	these	wave	lengths	only,	and	we	find
inthespectrumaseriesofbrightlinespicturesoftheslitproducedbylightofthese
particularwavelengthswhilebetweenthesebrightlinesliedarkspacesshowingthe
absence	from	the	radiant	energy	of	light	of	intermediate	wave	lengths.	such	a	spectrum	is
shown	in	the	central	portion	of	fig.	47,	which,	as	we	have	already	seen,	is	produced	by	the
space	between	the	carbons	of	the	arc	lamp.	on	the	other	hand,	if	the	molecules	are	closely
packed	together	under	pressure	they	so	interfere	with	each	other	as	to	give	off	a	jumble	of
energyofall	wavelengthsandthisistranslatedbythespectroscopeintoacontinuous
ribbon	of	light	with	no	dark	spaces	intervening,	as	in	the	upper	and	lower	parts	of	figs.	47
andproducedbytheincandescentsolidcarbonsofthelampthesetwotypesare
known	as	the	continuous	and	discontinuous	spectrum,	and	we	may	lay	down	the	following
principle	regarding	them:
a	discontinuous	spectrum,	or	bright-line	spectrum	as	it	is	familiarly	called,	indicates	that
the	molecules	of	the	source	of	light	are	not	crowded	together,	and	therefore	the	light	must
come	from	an	incandescent	gas.	a	continuous	spectrum	shows	only	that	the	molecules	are
crowded	together,	or	are	so	numerous	that	the	body	to	which	they	belong	is	not	transparent
and	gives	nofurtherinformation.	the	body	may	besolidliquidor	gaseousbutinthe
latter	case	the	gas	must	be	under	considerable	pressure	or	of	great	extent.
a	second	principle	is:	the	lines	which	appear	in	a	spectrum	are	characteristic	of	the	source
from	which	the	light	came—e.	g.,	the	double	line	in	the	yellow	part	of	the	spectrum	at	the
extreme	left	in	fig.	47	is	produced	by	sodium	vapor	in	and	around	the	electric	arc	and	is
never	produced	by	anything	but	sodium.	when	by	laboratory	experiments	we	have	learned
the	particular	set	of	lines	corresponding	to	iron,	we	may	treat	the	presence	of	these	lines	in
anotherspectrum	as	proofthatironispresentinthesourcefrom	whichthelightcame,
whether	that	source	be	a	white-hot	poker	in	the	next	room	or	a	star	immeasurably	distant.
the	evidence	that	iron	is	present	lies	in	the	nature	of	the	light,	and	there	is	no	reason	to
suppose	that	nature	to	be	altered	on	the	way	from	star	to	earth.	it	may,	however,	be	altered
by	something	happening	to	the	source	from	which	it	comes—e.	g.,	changing	temperature
or	pressure	may	affect,	and	does	affect,	the	spectrum	which	such	a	substance	as	iron	emits,
and	we	mustbepreparedtofindthesamesubstancepresentingdifferentspectraunder
differentconditionsonlytheseconditionsmustbegreatlyalteredinordertoproduce
radical	changes	in	the	spectrum.
fig.	50.—the	chief	lines	in	the	spectrum	of	sunlight.—herschel.
fig.	50.—the	chief	lines	in	the	spectrum	of	sunlight.—herschel.
86.	wave	lengths.—to	identify	a	line	as	belonging	to	and	produced	by	iron	or	any	other
substanceitspositioninthespectrum—ieits	wavelength—mustbeveryaccurately
determined,	and	for	the	identification	of	a	substance	by	means	of	its	spectrum	it	is	often
necessarytodetermineaccuratelythewavelengthsofmanylinesacomplicated
spectrum	mayconsistofhundredsorthousandsoflinesduetothepresenceofmany
different	substances	in	the	source	of	light,	and	unless	great	care	is	taken	in	assigning	the
exact	position	of	these	lines	in	the	spectrum,	confusion	and	wrong	identifications	are	sure
to	result.	for	the	measurement	of	the	required	wave	length	a	tenth	meter	(§	75)	is	the	unit
employed,	and	a	scale	of	wave	lengths	expressed	in	this	unit	is	presented	in	fig.	50.	the
accuracy	with	which	some	of	these	wave	lengths	are	determined	is	truly	astounding;	a	ten-
billionth	of	an	inch!	these	numerical	wave	lengths	save	all	necessity	for	referring	to	the
color	of	any	part	of	the	spectrum,	and	pictures	of	spectra	for	scientific	use	are	not	usually
printed	in	colors.
87.	absorption	spectra.—there	is	another	kind	of	spectrum,	of	greater	importance	than
eitherofthoseaboveconsideredwhichiswellillustratedbythespectrumofsunlight
(figthisisanearlycontinuousspectrumcrossedbynumerous	darklinesdueto
absorption	ofradiantenergyinacomparativelycool	gasthrough	whichitpasses	onits
waytothespectroscopefraunhoferwhomadethefirstcarefulstudyofspectra,
designated	some	ofthe	more	conspicuous	ofthese	lines	by	letters	ofthe	alphabet	which
are	shown	in	the	plate,	and	which	are	still	in	common	use	as	names	for	the	lines,	not	only
in	the	spectrum	of	sunlight	but	wherever	they	occur	in	other	spectra.	thus	the	double	line
marked	d,	wave	length	5893,	falls	at	precisely	the	same	place	in	the	spectrum	as	does	the
double(sodiumlinewhichwehavealreadyseenintheyellowpartofthearc-light
spectrum,	which	line	is	also	called	d	and	bears	a	very	intimate	relation	to	the	dark	d	line
of	the	solar	spectrum.
thestudentwhohasaccesstocoloredcrayonsshouldcoloroneedgeoffigin
accordancewiththeletteringtheregivenandsofaraspossibleheshouldmakethe
transition	from	one	color	to	the	next	a	gradual	one,	as	it	is	in	the	rainbow.
fig.	50	is	far	from	being	a	complete	representation	of	the	spectrum	of	sunlight.	not	only
doesthisspectrumextendbothtotherightandtotheleftintoregionsinvisibletothe
humaneyebutwithinthelimitsofthefigureinsteadoftheseventy-fivelinesthere
shownthereareliterallythousandsuponthousandsoflinesofwhichonlythemost
conspicuous	can	be	shown	in	such	a	cut	as	this.
the	dark	lines	which	appear	in	the	spectrum	of	sunlight	can,	under	proper	conditions,	be
madetoappearinthespectrumofanarclightandfigshowsamagnified
representation	of	a	small	part	of	such	a	spectrum	adjacent	to	the	d	(sodium)	lines.	down
themiddleofeachoftheselinesrunsablackstreakwhoseposition(wavelengthis
precisely	that	of	the	d	lines	in	the	spectrum	of	sunlight,	and	whose	presence	is	explained
as	follows:
the	very	hot	sodium	vapor	at	the	center	of	the	arc	gives	off	its	characteristic	light,	which,
shining	through	the	outer	and	cooler	layers	of	sodium	vapor,	is	partially	absorbed	by	these,
resulting	in	a	fine	dark	line	corresponding	exactly	in	position	and	wave	length	to	the	bright
lines,	and	seen	against	these	as	a	background,	since	the	higher	temperature	at	the	center	of
the	arc	tends	to	broaden	the	bright	lines	and	make	them	diffuse.	similarly	the	dark	lines	in
thespectrumofthesun(figpointtotheexistenceofasurroundingenvelopeof
relativelycoolgaseswhichabsorbfromthesunlightpreciselythosekindsofradiant
energy	which	they	would	themselves	emit	if	incandescent.	the	resulting	dark	lines	in	the
spectrum	are	to	be	interpreted	by	the	same	set	of	principles	which	we	have	above	applied
tothebrightlinesofadiscontinuousspectrumandthey	may	be	usedtodeterminethe
chemical	composition	of	the	sun,	just	as	the	bright	lines	serve	to	determine	the	chemical
elements	present	in	the	electric	arc.	with	reference	to	the	mode	of	their	formation,	bright-
lineanddark-linespectraaresometimescalledrespectivelyemissionandabsorption
spectra.
fig.	51.—the	lines	reversed.
fig.	51.—the	lines	reversed.
88.	types	of	spectrum.—the	sun	presents	by	far	the	most	complex	spectrum	known,	and
figshowsonlyasmallnumberofthe	moreconspicuouslineswhichappearinit.
spectra	of	stars,	per	contra,	appear	relatively	simple,	since	their	feeble	light	is	insufficient
to	bring	out	faint	details.	in	chapters	xiii	and	xiv	there	are	shown	types	of	the	different
kinds	of	spectra	given	by	starlight,	and	these	are	to	be	interpreted	by	the	principles	above
established.	thus	the	spectrum	of	the	bright	star	β	aurigæ	shows	a	continuous	spectrum
crossed	by	a	few	heavy	absorption	lines	which	are	known	from	laboratory	experiments	to
be	produced	only	by	hydrogen.	there	must	therefore	be	an	atmosphere	of	relatively	cool
hydrogen	surrounding	this	star.	the	spectrum	of	pollux	is	quite	similar	to	that	of	the	sun
and	isto	be	interpreted	as	showing	a	physical	condition	similartothat	ofthe	sun,	while
thespectrumofherculisisquitedifferentfromeitheroftheothersinsubsequent
chapters	we	shall	have	occasion	to	consider	more	fully	these	different	types	of	spectrum.
89.	the	doppler	principle.—thisimportantprincipleofthespectrum	analysisis	most
readily	appreciated	through	the	following	experiment:
listentothewhistleofalocomotiverapidlyapproachingandobservehowthepitch
changes	and	the	note	becomes	more	grave	as	the	locomotive	passes	by	and	commences	to
recededuringtheapproachofthewhistleeachsuccessivesoundwavehasashorter
distancetotravelincomingtotheearofthelistenerthanhaditspredecessorandin
consequencethe	wavesappeartocomeinquickersuccessionproducingahighernote
with	a	correspondingly	shorter	wave	length	than	would	be	heard	if	the	same	whistle	were
blown	with	the	locomotive	at	rest.	on	the	other	hand,	the	wave	length	is	increased	and	the
pitchofthenoteloweredbytherecedingmotionofthewhistleasimilareffectis
produced	upon	the	wave	length	of	light	by	a	rapid	change	of	distance	between	the	source
from	which	it	comes	and	the	instrument	which	receives	it,	so	that	a	diminishing	distance
diminishesveryslightlythe	wavelength	ofeverylineinthespectrum	produced	bythe
light,	and	an	increasing	distance	increases	these	wave	lengths,	and	this	holds	true	whether
the	change	of	distanceis	produced	by	motion	ofthe	source	oflight	or	by	motion	ofthe
instrument	which	receives	it.
this	change	of	wave	length	is	sometimes	described	by	saying	that	when	a	body	is	rapidly
approachingthelinesofitsspectrumarealldisplacedtowardthevioletendofthe
spectrum,	and	are	correspondingly	displaced	toward	the	red	end	by	a	receding	motion.	the
amount	of	this	shifting,	when	it	can	be	measured,	measures	the	velocity	of	the	body	along
thelineofsightbuttheobservationsareexceedinglydelicateanditisonlyinrecent
years	that	it	has	been	found	possible	to	make	them	with	precision.	for	this	purpose	there	is
made	to	pass	through	the	spectroscope	light	from	an	artificial	source	which	contains	one
or	more	chemical	elements	known	to	be	present	in	the	star	which	is	to	be	observed,	and
thecorrespondinglinesinthespectrum	ofthislightandinthespectrum	ofthestarare
examinedtodeterminewhethertheyexactlymatchinpositionorshowasthey
sometimes	do,	a	slight	displacement,	asif	one	spectrum	had	been	slipped	pastthe	other.
thedifficultyoftheobservationsliesintheextremelysmallamountofthisslipping,
which	rarely	if	ever	in	the	case	of	a	moving	star	amounts	to	one	sixth	part	of	the	interval
between	the	close	parallel	lines	marked	d	in	fig.	50.	the	spectrallines	furnished	by	the
headlightofalocomotiverunningattherateofahundredmilesperhourwouldbe
displacedbythis	motionlessthanonesix-thousandthpartofthespacebetweenthe	d
linesanamountabsolutelyimperceptibleinthemostpowerfulspectroscopeyet
constructedbutmanyofthecelestialbodieshavevelocitiessomuchgreaterthana
hundred	miles	per	hour	that	these	may	be	detected	and	measured	by	means	of	the	doppler
principleotherinstruments.—otherinstrumentsofimportancetotheastronomerbutof
which	only	casual	mention	can	here	be	made,	are	the	meridian-circle;	the	transit,	one	form
of	which	is	shown	in	fig.	52,	and	the	zenith	telescope,	which	furnish	refined	methods	for
makingobservationssimilarinkindtothosewhichthestudenthasalreadylearnedto
makewithplumblineandprotractorthesextantwhichispre-eminentlythesailor’s
instrument	for	finding	the	latitude	and	longitude	at	sea,	by	measuring	the	altitudes	of	sun
andstarsabovetheseahorizontheheliometerwhichservesfortheveryaccurate
measurementofsmallanglessuchastheangulardistancebetweentwostarsnot	more
thanoneortwodegreesapartandthephotometerwhichisusedformeasuringthe
amount	of	light	received	from	the	celestial	bodies.
fig.	52.—a	combined	transit	instrument	and	zenith	telescope.
fig.	52.—a	combined	transit	instrument	and	zenith	telescope.

chapter	ix
the	moon
91.	resultsofobservationwiththeunaidedeye.—thestudentwhohasmadethe
observations	of	the	moon	which	are	indicated	in	chapter	iii	has	in	hand	data	from	which
much	may	be	learned	about	the	earth’s	satellite.	perhaps	the	most	striking	feature	brought
out	bythemisthe	motion	ofthe	moon	amongthestarsalwaysfrom	westtoward	east,
accompanied	by	that	endless	series	of	changes	in	shape	and	brightness—new	moon,	first
quarter,	full	moon,	etc.—whose	successive	stages	we	represent	by	the	words,	the	phase	of
themoonfromhisownobservationthestudentshouldbeabletoverifyatleast
approximatelythefollowingstatementsalthoughthedegreeofnumericalprecision
containedin	some	ofthem	can	bereached	only	by	more	elaborate	apparatus	andlonger
study	than	he	has	given	to	the	subject:
a.	the	phase	ofthe	moon	depends	upon	the	distance	apart	of	sun	and	moon	inthe	sky,
new	moon	coming	whenthey	aretogetherandfull	moon	whenthey	are	asfarapartas
possible.
the	moon,	one	day	after	first	quarter.	from	a	photograph	made	at	the
paris	observatory.
the	moon,	one	day	after	first	quarter.	from	a	photograph	made	at
the	paris	observatory.
b.	the	moon	is	essentially	a	round,	dark	body,	giving	off	no	light	of	its	own,	but	shining
solely	by	reflected	sunlight.	the	proof	of	this	is	that	whenever	we	see	a	part	of	the	moon
which	is	turned	away	from	the	sun	it	looks	dark—e.	g.,	at	new	moon,	sun	and	moon	are	in
nearly	the	same	direction	from	us	and	we	see	little	or	nothing	of	the	moon,	since	the	side
uponwhichthesunshinesisturnedawayfromusatfullmoontheearthisinline
between	sun	and	moon,	and	we	see,	round	and	bright,	the	face	upon	which	the	sun	shines.
at	other	phases,	such	as	the	quartersthe	moon	turns	toward	the	earth	a	part	of	its	night
hemisphere	and	a	part	of	its	day	hemisphere,	but	in	general	only	that	part	which	belongs	to
the	day	side	of	the	moon	is	visible	and	the	peculiar	curved	line	which	forms	the	boundary
—the	“ragged	edge,”	orterminatorasitis	calledisthe	dividingline	between	day	and
night	upon	the	moon.
a	partialexceptionto	what	precedesisfoundforafew	daysafter	new	moon	whenthe
moon	and	sun	are	not	very	far	apart	in	the	sky,	for	then	the	whole	round	disk	of	the	moon
may	often	beseen,	asmall	part	ofit	brightlyilluminated	bythesun	andthelarger	part
feebly	illuminated	by	sunlight	which	fell	first	upon	the	earth	and	was	by	it	reflected	back
to	the	moon,	giving	the	pleasing	effect	which	is	sometimes	called	the	old	moon	in	the	new
moon’sarmsthenew	moon—iethepartilluminedbythesun—usuallyappearsto
belong	to	a	sphere	of	larger	radius	than	the	old	moon,	but	this	is	purely	a	trick	played	by
the	eyes	ofthe	observer,	and	the	effect	disappears	altogetherin	atelescope.	isthere	any
similar	effect	in	the	few	days	before	new	moon?
c.	the	moon	makes	the	circuit	of	the	sky	from	a	given	star	around	to	the	same	star	again
in	a	little	more	than	27	days	(27.32166),	but	the	interval	between	successive	new	moons—
iefromthesun	aroundtothesun	again—is	morethan	29	days(29.53059).	thislast
interval,	which	is	called	a	lunar	month	or	synodical	month,	indicates	what	we	have	learned
before—thatthesun	haschangeditsplaceamongthestarsduringthe	monthsothatit
takes	the	moon	an	extra	two	days	to	overtake	him	after	having	made	the	circuit	of	the	sky,
just	asittakesthe	minute	hand	of	a	clock	an	extra	5	minutesto	catch	up	withthe	hour
hand	after	having	made	a	complete	circuit	of	the	dial.
d.	wherever	the	moon	may	be	in	the	sky,	it	turns	always	the	same	face	toward	the	earth,
asis	shown	by	the	factthatthe	dark	markings	which	appear	on	its	surface	stand	always
upon	(nearly)	the	same	part	of	its	disk.	it	does	not	always	turn	the	same	face	toward	the
sun,	for	the	boundary	line	between	the	illumined	and	unillumined	parts	of	the	moon	shifts
from	one	side	to	the	other	as	the	phase	changes,	dividing	at	each	moment	day	from	night
upon	the	moon	and	illustrating	by	its	slow	progressthat	upon	the	moon	the	day	and	the
month	are	of	equallengthterrestrial	daysinstead	of	beingtime	units	of	different
lengths	as	with	us.
fig.	53.—motion	of	moon	and	earth	relative	to	the	sun.
fig.	53.—motion	of	moon	and	earth	relative	to	the	sunthemoon’smotion.—thestudentshouldcomparetheresultsofhisown
observations,	as	well	as	the	preceding	section,	with	fig.	53,	in	which	the	lines	with	dates
printedonthemareallsupposedtoradiatefromthesunandtorepresentthedirection
from	the	sun	of	earth	and	moon	upon	the	given	dates	which	are	arbitrarily	assumed	for	the
sake	of	illustration,	any	other	set	would	do	equally	well.	the	black	dots,	small	and	large,
representthemoonrevolvingabouttheearthbuthavingthecircularpathshownin
fig.	34	(ellipse)	transformed	by	the	earth’s	forward	motion	into	the	peculiar	sinuous	line
here	shown.	with	respect	to	both	earth	and	sun,	the	moon’s	orbit	deviates	but	little	from	a
circle,	since	the	sinuous	curve	of	fig.	53	follows	very	closely	the	earth’s	orbit	around	the
sun	andisalmostidentical	withit.	forclearness	ofrepresentationthe	distance	between
earth	and	moon	in	the	figure	has	been	made	ten	times	too	great,	and	to	get	a	proper	idea	of
the	moon’s	orbit	with	reference	to	the	sun,	we	must	suppose	the	moon	moved	up	toward
the	earth	until	its	distance	from	the	line	of	the	earth’s	orbit	is	only	a	tenth	part	of	what	it	is
in	the	figure.	when	this	is	done,	the	moon’s	path	becomes	almost	indistinguishable	from
that	of	the	earth,	as	may	be	seen	in	the	figure,	where	the	attempt	has	been	made	to	show
both	lines,	and	itisto	be	especially	noted	thatthis	real	orbit	ofthe	moon	is	everywhere
concave	toward	the	sun.
the	phase	presented	by	the	moon	at	different	parts	of	its	path	is	indicated	by	the	row	of
circles	at	the	right,	and	the	student	should	show	why	a	new	moon	is	associated	with	june
30th	and	a	full	moon	with	july	15th,	etc.	what	was	the	date	of	first	quarter?	third	quarter?
we	may	find	in	fig.	53	another	effect	of	the	same	kind	as	that	noted	above	in	c.	between
noonjune30thandnoonjuly3dtheearthmakesuponitsaxisthreecomplete
revolutions	withrespecttothesunbutthe	meridian	whichpointstowardthe	moonat
noon	on	june	30th	will	not	point	toward	it	at	noon	on	july	3d,	since	the	moon	has	moved
intoanewpositionandisnowawayfromthemeridianverifythisstatementby
measuring,	in	fig.	53,	with	the	protractor,	the	moon’s	angular	distance	from	the	meridian
at	noon	on	july	3d.	when	will	the	meridian	overtake	the	moon?
93.	harvest	moon.—the	interval	between	two	successive	transits	of	the	meridian	past	the
mooniscalledalunardayandthestudentshouldshowfromthefigurethatonthe
average	a	lunar	day	is	51	minutes	longer	than	a	solar	day—i.	e.,	upon	the	average	each	day
the	moon	comes	to	the	meridian	51	minutes	of	solar	time	later	than	on	the	day	before.	it	is
also	true	that	on	the	average	the	moon	rises	and	sets	51	minutes	later	each	day	than	on	the
daybeforebutthereisagooddealofirregularityintheretardationofthetimeof
moonrise	and	moonset,	since	the	time	of	rising	depends	largely	upon	the	particular	point
of	the	horizon	at	which	the	moon	appears,	and	between	two	days	this	point	may	change	so
muchonaccountofthe	moon’sorbital	motionasto	maketheretardationconsiderably
greaterorlessthanitsaveragevalueinnorthernlatitudesthiseffectisparticularly
markedinthe	month	of	september,	whenthe	eastern	horizonis	nearly	parallel	withthe
moon’s	apparent	path	in	the	sky,	and	near	the	time	of	full	moon	in	that	month	the	moon
rises	on	several	successive	nights	at	nearly	the	same	hour,	and	in	less	degree	the	same	is
trueforoctoberthishighlyconvenientarrangementof	moonlighthascausedthefull
moonsofthesetwomonthstobechristenedrespectivelytheharvestmoonandthe
hunter’s	moon.
94.	size	and	mass	of	the	moon.—it	has	been	shown	in	chapter	i	how	the	distance	of	the
moon	from	the	earth	may	be	measured	and	its	diameter	determined	by	means	of	angles,
and	without	enlarging	upon	the	details	ofthese	observations,	we	note	astheir	resultthat
the	moonisaglobe	2,163	milesindiameterand	distantfromtheearthontheaverage
about	240,000	miles.	butas	we	haveseenin	chapter	viithis	distancechangestothe
extent	of	a	few	thousand	miles,	sometimes	less,	sometimes	greater,	mainly	on	account	of
the	elliptic	shape	of	the	moon’s	orbit	about	the	earth,	but	also	in	part	from	the	disturbing
influence	of	other	bodies,	such	as	the	sun,	which	pull	the	moon	to	and	fro,	backward	and
forward,	to	quite	an	appreciable	extent.
from	the	known	diameter	of	the	moon	it	is	a	matter	of	elementary	geometry	to	derive	in
miles	the	area	of	its	surface	and	its	volume	or	solid	contents.	leaving	this	as	an	exercise
for	the	student,	we	adopt	the	earth	as	the	standard	of	comparison	and	find	that	the	diameter
of	the	moon	is	rather	more	than	a	quarter,	4/15,	that	of	the	earth,	the	area	of	its	surface	is	a
trifle	more	than	1/14	that	of	the	earth,	and	its	volume	a	little	more	than	1/49	of	the	earth’s.
so	much	is	pure	geometry,	but	we	may	combine	with	it	some	mechanical	principles	which
enable	us	to	go	a	step	farther	and	to	“weigh”	the	moon—i.	e.,	determine	its	mass	and	the
average	density	of	the	material	of	which	it	is	made.
we	have	seen	that	the	moon	moves	around	the	sun	in	a	path	differing	but	little	from	the
smoothcurveshowninfigwitharrowsindicatingthedirectionof	motionandit
would	follow	absolutely	such	a	smooth	path	were	it	not	for	the	attraction	of	the	earth,	and
in	less	degree	of	some	of	the	other	planets,	which	swing	it	about	first	to	one	side	then	to
the	other.	but	action	and	reaction	are	equal;	the	moon	pulls	as	strongly	upon	the	earth	as
does	the	earth	upon	the	moon,	and	if	earth	and	moon	were	of	equal	mass,	the	deviation	of
the	earth	from	the	smooth	curve	in	the	figure	would	be	just	as	large	as	that	of	the	moon.	it
is	shown	in	the	figure	that	the	moon	does	displace	the	earth	from	this	curve,	and	we	have
onlyto	measuretheamountofthisdisplacementoftheearthandcompareitwiththe
displacement	suffered	by	the	moon	to	find	how	much	the	mass	of	the	one	exceeds	that	of
the	other.	it	may	be	seen	from	the	figure	that	at	first	quarter,	about	july	7ththe	earth	is
thrust	ahead	in	the	direction	of	its	orbital	motion,	while	at	the	third	quarter,	july	22d,	it	is
pulled	back	by	the	action	of	the	moon,	and	at	all	times	it	is	more	or	less	displaced	by	this
action,	so	that,	in	order	to	be	strictly	correct,	we	must	amend	our	former	statement	about
the	moon	moving	around	the	earth	and	make	it	read,	both	earth	and	moon	revolve	around
a	point	on	line	between	their	centers.	this	point	is	called	their	center	of	gravity,	andthe
earth	andthe	moon	both	movein	ellipses	havingthis	center	of	gravity	attheir	common
focus.	comparethis	with	kepler’s	first	law.	these	ellipses	are	similarly	shaped,	but	of
very	different	size,	corresponding	to	newton’sthirdlaw	of	motion	(chapteriv),	sothat
the	action	of	the	earth	in	causing	the	small	moon	to	move	around	a	large	orbit	is	just	equal
to	the	reaction	of	the	moon	in	causing	the	larger	earth	to	move	in	the	smaller	orbit.	this	is
equivalent	to	saying	that	the	dimensions	of	the	two	orbits	are	inversely	proportional	to	the
masses	of	the	earth	and	the	moon.
by	observingthroughoutthe	monththe	directionfromtheearthtothesun	ortoa	near
planetsuchasmarsorvenusastronomershavedeterminedthatthediameterofthe
ellipse	in	which	the	earth	moves	is	about	5,850	miles,	so	that	the	distance	of	the	earth	from
thecenterofgravityismilesandthedistanceofthemoonfromitis
240,000	-	2,925	=	237,075.	we	may	now	write	in	the	form	of	a	proportion—
mass	of	earth	:	mass	of	moon	::	237,075	:	2,925,
and	find	from	it	that	the	mass	of	the	earth	is	81	times	as	great	as	the	mass	of	the	moon—
i.	e.,	leaving	kind	and	quality	out	of	account,	there	is	enough	material	in	the	earth	to	make
81	moons.	we	may	note	in	this	connection	that	the	diameter	of	the	earth,	7,926	miles,	is
greater	than	the	diameter	of	the	monthly	orbit	in	which	the	moon	causes	it	to	move,	and
therefore	the	center	of	gravity	of	earth	and	moon	always	lies	inside	the	body	of	the	earth,
about	1,000	miles	below	the	surface.
95.	density	of	the	moon.—it	is	believed	that	in	a	general	way	the	moon	is	made	of	much
the	same	kind	of	material	which	goes	to	make	up	the	earth—metals,	minerals,	rocks,	etc.
—andapartoftheevidenceupon	whichthisbeliefisbasedliesinthedensityofthe
moon.	by	density	of	a	substance	we	mean	the	amount	of	it	which	is	contained	in	a	given
volume—iethe	weightofabusheloracubiccentimeterofthestuff.	the	densityof
chalk	is	twice	as	great	as	the	density	of	water,	because	a	cubic	centimeter	of	chalk	weighs
twiceas	muchasanequalvolumeof	waterandsimilarlyinothercasesthedensityis
foundbydividingthemassorweightofthebodybythemassorweightofanequal
volume	of	water.
we	know	the	mass	of	the	earth	(§	45),	and	knowing	the	mass	of	a	cubic	foot	of	water,	it	is
easy,	although	a	trifle	tedious,	to	compute	what	would	be	the	mass	of	a	volume	of	water
equalin	sizetothe	earth.	the	quotient	obtained	by	dividing	one	ofthese	masses	bythe
other	(mass	of	earth	÷	mass	of	water)	is	the	average	density	of	the	material	composing	the
earthand	wefindnumericallythatthisis5.6—ieitwouldtake5.6	waterearthsto
attract	as	strongly	as	does	the	real	one.	from	direct	experiment	we	know	that	the	average
density	ofthe	principal	rocks	which	make	up	the	crust	ofthe	earth	is	only	about	half	of
thisshowingthatthedeep-lyingcentralpartsoftheeartharedenserthanthesurface
parts,	as	we	should	expect	them	to	be,	because	they	have	to	bear	the	weight	of	all	that	lies
above	them	and	are	compressed	by	it.
turning	now	to	the	moon,	we	find	in	the	same	way	as	for	the	earth	that	its	average	density
is	3.4	as	great	as	that	of	water.
96.	force	of	gravity	upon	the	moon.—this	number,	3.4,	compared	withthe	5.6	which
we	found	for	the	earth,	shows	that	on	the	whole	the	moon	is	made	of	lighter	stuff	than	is
the	body	of	the	earth,	and	this	again	is	much	what	we	should	expect	to	find,	for	weight,	the
force	whichtendstocompressthesubstanceofthe	moonislesstherethanherethe
weightofacubicyardofrockatthesurfaceofeitherearthor	moonistheforce	with
which	the	earth	or	moon	attracts	it,	and	this	by	the	law	of	gravitation	is	for	the	earth—
w	=	k	·	(m	m’)/(3963)2;
and	for	the	moon—
w	=	k	·	{m	(m’/81)}/(1081)2;
from	which	we	find	by	division—
w	=	(w/81)	(3963/1081)2	=	w/6	(approximately).
the	cubic	yard	of	rock,	which	upon	the	earth	weighs	two	tons,	would,	if	transported	to	the
moon,	weigh	only	one	third	of	a	ton,	and	would	have	only	one	sixth	as	much	influence	in
compressingtherocksbelowitasithadupontheearthnotethatthisrockwhen
transportedtothemoonwouldbestillattractedbytheearthandwouldhaveweight
toward	the	earth,	but	it	is	not	this	of	which	we	are	speaking;	by	its	weight	in	the	moon	we
mean	the	force	with	which	the	moon	attracts	it.	making	due	allowance	for	the	difference
in	compression	produced	by	weight,	we	may	say	that	in	general,	so	far	as	density	goes,	the
moon	is	very	like	a	piece	of	the	earth	of	equal	mass	set	off	by	itself	alone.
97.	albedo.—in	another	respect	the	lunar	stuff	is	like	that	of	which	the	earth	is	made:	it
reflects	the	sunlight	in	much	the	same	way	and	to	the	same	amount.	the	contrast	of	light
anddarkareasonthemoon’ssurfaceshowsasweshallseeinanothersectionthe
presenceofdifferentsubstancesuponthemoonwhichreflectthesunlightindifferent
degrees.	this	capacity	for	reflecting	a	greater	or	less	percentage	of	the	incident	sunlight	is
called	albedo(latin,	whitenessandthebrilliancyofthefull	moon	mightleadoneto
suppose	that	its	albedo	is	very	great,	like	that	of	snow	or	those	masses	of	summer	cloud
whichwecallthunderheadsbutthisisonlyaneffectofcontrastwiththedark
background	ofthe	sky.	the	same	moon	by	day	looks	pale,	and	its	albedo	isin	fact,	not
very	different	from	that	of	our	common	rocks—weather-beaten	sandstone	according	to	sir
john	herschel—sothatit	would	be	possibleto	build	an	artificial	moon	ofrock	or	brick
which	would	shine	in	the	sunlight	much	as	does	the	real	moon.
the	effect	produced	by	the	differences	of	albedo	upon	the	moon’s	face	is	commonly	called
the	“maninthe	moon,”	butliketheimages	presented	by	glowing	coalsthefaceinthe
moonisanythingwhichwechoosetomakeitamongthechineseitissaidtobea
monkey	pounding	rice;	in	india,	a	rabbit;	in	persia,	the	earth	reflected	as	in	a	mirror,	etc.
98.	librations.—wehavealreadylearnedthatthemoonturnsalwaysthesameface
toward	the	earth,	and	we	have	now	to	modify	this	statement	and	to	find	that	here,	as	in	so
manyothercasesthethingwelearnfirstisonlyapproximatelytrueandneedstobe
limitedoraddedtoor	modifiedinsome	wayingeneralnatureistoocomplextobe
completely	understood	at	first	sight	or	to	be	perfectly	represented	by	a	simple	statement.
in	fig.	55	we	have	two	photographs	of	the	moon,	taken	nearly	three	years	apart,	the	right-
hand	one	a	little	after	first	quarter	and	the	left-hand	one	a	little	before	third	quarter.	they
thereforerepresentdifferentpartsofthe	moon’ssurfacebutalongtheraggededgethe
sameregionisshown	on	bothphotographsandfeaturescommontobothpictures	may
readily	be	found—e.	g.,	the	three	rings	which	form	a	right-angled	triangle	about	one	third
of	the	way	down	from	the	top	of	the	cut,	and	the	curved	mountain	chain	just	below	these.
if	the	moon	turned	exactly	the	same	face	toward	us	in	the	two	pictures,	the	distance	of	any
one	of	these	markings	from	any	part	of	the	moon’s	edge	must	be	the	same	in	both	pictures;
butcarefulmeasurementwillshowthatthisisnotthecaseandthatintheleft-hand
picture	the	upper	edge	of	the	moon	is	tipped	toward	us	and	the	lower	edge	away	from	us,
as	if	the	whole	moon	had	been	rotated	slightly	about	a	horizontal	line	and	must	be	turned
back	a	little	(about	7°)	in	order	to	match	perfectly	the	other	part	of	the	picture.
this	turning	is	called	a	libration,	and	it	should	be	borne	in	mind	that	the	moon	librates	not
only	in	the	direction	above	measured,	north	and	south,	but	also	at	right	angles	to	this,	east
and	west,	so	that	we	are	able	to	see	a	little	farther	around	every	part	of	the	moon’s	edge
than	would	be	possibleifitturnedtoward	usatalltimesexactlythesameface.	butin
spite	of	the	librations	there	remains	on	the	farther	side	of	the	moon	an	area	of	6,000,000
square	miles	which	is	forever	hidden	from	us,	and	of	whose	character	we	have	no	direct
knowledgealthoughthereisnoreasontosupposeitverydifferentfromthat	whichis
visible,	despite	the	fact	that	some	of	the	books	contain	quaint	speculations	to	the	contrary.
the	continent	of	south	america	is	just	about	equal	in	extent	to	this	unknown	region,	while
north	america	is	a	fair	equivalent	for	all	the	rest	of	the	moon’s	surface,	both	those	central
parts	which	are	constantly	visible,	andthe	zone	around	the	edge	whose	parts	sometimes
come	into	sight	and	are	sometimes	hidden.
an	interesting	consequence	of	the	peculiar	rotation	of	the	moon	is	that	from	our	side	of	it
the	earth	is	always	visible.	sun,	stars,	and	planets	rise	and	set	there	as	well	as	here,	but	to
anobserveronthe	moontheearthswingsalwaysoverheadshiftingitspositionafew
degrees	one	way	or	the	other	on	account	of	the	libration	but	running	through	its	succession
of	phases,	new	earth,	first	quarter,	etc.,	without	ever	going	below	the	horizon,	provided	the
observer	is	anywhere	near	the	center	of	the	moon’s	disk.
fig.	54.—illustrating	the	moon’s	rotation.	fig.	54.—illustrating	the	moon’s	rotation.
99.	cause	of	librations.—that	the	moon	should	librateis	by	no	means	so	remarkable	a
fact	as	that	it	should	at	all	times	turn	very	nearly	the	same	face	toward	the	earth.	this	latter
fact	can	have	but	one	meaning:	the	moon	revolves	about	an	axis	as	does	the	earth,	but	the
time	required	for	this	revolution	is	just	equal	to	the	time	required	to	make	a	revolution	in
itsorbitplacetwocoinsuponatablewiththeirheadsturnedtowardthenorthasin
figandmovethesmalleronearoundthelargerinsuchawaythatitsfaceshall
always	look	away	from	the	larger	one.	in	making	one	revolution	in	its	orbitthe	head	on
this	small	coin	will	be	successively	directed	toward	every	point	of	the	compass,	and	when
it	returns	to	its	initial	position	the	small	coin	will	have	made	just	one	revolution	about	an
axis	perpendicular	to	the	plane	of	its	orbit.	in	no	other	way	can	it	be	made	to	face	always
away	from	the	figure	at	the	center	of	its	orbit	while	moving	around	it.
we	are	now	in	a	position	to	understand	the	moon’s	librations,	for,	if	the	small	coin	at	any
time	movesfasterorslowerinitsorbitthanitturnsaboutitsaxisanewside	willbe
turned	toward	the	center,	and	the	same	may	happen	if	the	central	coin	itself	shifts	into	a
newpositionthisiswhathappenstothemoonforitsorbitalmotionlikethatof
mercury	(figisalternatelyfastandslowandinadditiontothistherearepresent
other	minor	influences,	such	as	the	fact	that	its	rotation	axis	is	not	exactly	perpendicular	to
the	plane	of	its	orbit;	in	addition	to	this	the	observer	upon	the	earth	is	daily	carried	by	its
rotation	from	one	point	of	view	to	another,	etc.,	so	that	it	is	only	in	a	general	way	that	the
rotation	upon	the	axis	and	motion	in	the	orbit	keep	pace	with	each	other.	in	a	general	way
a	cable	keeps	a	ship	anchored	in	the	same	place,	although	wind	and	waves	may	cause	it	to
“librate”	about	the	anchor.
howthemooncametohavethisexactequalitybetweenitstimesofrevolutionand
rotationconstitutesachapterofitshistoryupon	which	weshallnotnowenterbutthe
equality	having	once	been	established,	the	mechanism	by	which	it	is	preserved	is	simple
enough.
theattraction	oftheearthforthe	moon	hasveryslightlypulledthelatteroutofshape
(§	42),	so	that	the	particular	diameter,	which	points	toward	the	earth,	is	a	little	longer	than
any	other,	and	thus	serves	as	a	handle	which	the	earth	lays	hold	of	and	pulls	down	into	its
lowestpossibleposition—iethepositionin	whichitpointstowardthecenterofthe
earth.	just	how	long	this	handle	is,	remains	unknown,	but	it	may	be	shown	from	the	law	of
gravitation	that	less	than	a	hundred	yards	of	elongation	would	suffice	for	the	work	it	has	to
do.
100.	the	moon	as	a	world.—thus	far	we	have	considered	the	moon	as	a	satellite	of	the
earth,	dependent	upon	the	earth,	and	interesting	chiefly	because	of	its	relation	to	it.	but	the
moonissomething	morethanthisitisa	worldinitselfverydifferentfromtheearth,
although	not	wholly	unlike	it.	the	most	characteristic	feature	of	the	earth’s	surface	is	its
division	into	land	and	water,	and	nothing	of	this	kind	can	be	found	upon	the	moon.	itis
true	that	the	first	generation	of	astronomers	who	studied	the	moon	with	telescopes	fancied
that	the	large	dark	patches	shown	in	fig.	55	were	bodies	of	water,	and	named	them	oceans,
seaslakesand	pondsandtothe	present	day	we	keepthose	namesalthoughitislong
since	recognized	that	these	parts	of	the	moon’s	surface	are	as	dry	as	any	other.	their	dark
appearance	indicates	a	different	kind	of	material	from	that	composing	the	lighter	parts	of
the	moon,	material	with	a	different	albedojust	as	uponthe	earth	we	havelight-colored
and	dark-colored	rocks,	marble	and	slate,	which	seen	from	the	moon	must	present	similar
contrastsofbrightnessalthoughthesedarkpatchesarealmosttheonlyfeatures
distinguishable	with	the	unaided	eye,	it	is	far	otherwise	in	the	telescope	or	the	photograph,
especiallyalongtheraggededge	wheregreatnumbersofringscanbeseen,	whichare
apparently	depressions	in	the	moon	and	are	called	craters.	these	we	find	in	great	number
all	over	the	moon,	but,	as	the	figure	showsthey	are	seen	to	the	best	advantage	near	the
terminator—iethedividinglinebetweendayandnightsincethelongshadowscast
here	by	the	rising	or	setting	sun	bring	out	the	details	of	the	surface	better	than	elsewhere.
carefully	examine	fig.	55	with	reference	to	these	features.
fig.	55.—the	moon	at	first	and	last	quarter.	lick	observatory	photographs.
fig.	55.—the	moon	at	first	and	last	quarter.	lick	observatory	photographs.
another	feature	which	exists	upon	both	earth	and	moon,	although	far	less	common	there
than	here,	is	illustrated	in	the	chain	of	mountains	visible	near	the	terminator,	a	little	above
the	center	of	the	moon	in	both	parts	of	fig.	55.	this	particular	range	of	mountains,	which
is	called	the	lunar	apennines,	is	by	far	the	most	prominent	one	upon	the	moon,	although
othersthealpsandcaucasusexistbutforthemostpartthelunarmountainsstand
aloneeach	byitselfinstead	ofbeing	groupedintorangesasontheearth.	noteinthe
figure	that	some	of	the	lunar	mountains	stretch	out	into	the	night	side	of	the	moon,	their
peaks	projecting	upintothe	sunlight,	andthus	becoming	visible,	whilethelowlands	are
buried	in	the	shadow.
a	subordinate	feature	ofthe	moon’s	surface	isthe	system	of	rays	which	seem	to	radiate
like	spokes	from	some	of	the	larger	craters,	extending	over	hill	and	valley	sometimes	for
hundreds	of	miles.	a	suggestion	of	these	rays	may	be	seen	in	fig.	55,	extending	from	the
greatcratercopernicusalittlesouthwestoftheendoftheapenninesbuttheirmost
perfect	development	is	to	be	seen	at	the	time	of	full	moon	around	the	crater	tycho,	which
lies	near	the	south	pole	of	the	moon.	look	for	them	with	an	opera	glass.
another	and	even	less	conspicuous	feature	is	furnished	by	the	rills,	which,	under	favorable
conditionsofilluminationappearlikelongcracksonthemoon’ssurfaceperhaps
analogous	to	the	cañons	of	our	western	country.
101.	the	map	of	the	moon.—fig.	55	furnishes	a	fairly	good	map	of	a	limited	portion	of
the	moon	near	the	terminator,	but	at	the	edges	little	or	no	detail	can	be	seen.	this	is	always
true;	the	whole	of	the	moon	can	not	be	seen	to	advantage	at	any	one	time,	and	to	remedy
this	we	need	to	construct	from	many	photographs	or	drawings	a	map	which	shall	represent
theseveralpartsofthemoonastheyappearattheirbestfigshowssuchamap
photographed	from	a	relief	model	of	the	moon,	and	representing	the	principal	features	of
the	lunar	surface	in	a	way	they	can	never	be	seen	simultaneously.	perhaps	its	most	striking
feature	is	the	shape	of	the	craters,	which	are	shown	round	in	the	central	parts	of	the	map
and	oval	atthe	edges,	withtheirlong	diameters	paralleltothe	moon’s	edge.	thisis,	of
course,	an	effect	of	the	curvature	of	the	moon’s	surface,	for	we	look	very	obliquely	at	the
edgeportionsandthusseetheirformations	muchforeshortenedinthedirectionofthe
moon’s	radius.
fig.	56.—relief	map	of	the	moon’s	surface.—after	nasmyth	and	carpenter.
fig.	56.—relief	map	of	the	moon’s	surface.—after	nasmyth	and	carpenter.
the	north	and	south	poles	of	the	moon	are	at	the	top	and	bottom	of	the	map	respectively,
and	a	mere	inspection	of	the	regions	around	them	will	show	how	much	more	rugged	is	the
southern	hemisphere	of	the	moon	than	the	northern.	it	furnishes,	too,	some	indication	of
how	numerous	are	the	lunar	craters,	and	how	in	crowded	regions	they	overlap	one	another.
the	student	should	pick	out	upon	the	map	those	features	which	he	has	learned	to	know	in
thephotograph(fig55)—theapenninescopernicusandthecontinuationofthe
apennines,	extending	into	the	dark	part	of	the	moon.
fig.	57.—mare	imbrium.	photographed	by	g.	w.	ritchey.
fig.	57.—mare	imbrium.	photographed	by	g.	w.	ritchey.
102.	sizeofthelunarfeatures.—we	may	measuredistanceshereinthesame	wayas
upon	a	terrestrial	map,	remembering	that	near	the	edges	the	scale	of	the	map	is	very	much
distortedparalleltothemoon’sdiameterand	measurementsmustnotbetakeninthis
directionbut	may	betaken	paralleltotheedge.	measuring	witha	millimeterscale,	we
find	on	the	map	for	the	diameter	of	the	crater	copernicus,	2.1	millimeters.	to	turn	this	into
the	diameter	of	the	real	copernicus	in	miles,	we	measure	upon	the	same	map	the	diameter
of	the	moon,	79.7	millimeters,	and	then	have	the	proportion—
diameter	of	copernicus	in	miles	:	2,163	::	2.1	:	79.7,
fig.	58.—mare	crisium.	lick	observatory	photographs.	fig.	58.—mare	crisium.
lick	observatory	photographs.
which	whensolvedgives57	milestherealdiameterof	copernicusisatrifleover56
miles.	at	the	eastern	edge	of	the	moon,	opposite	the	apennines,	is	a	large	oval	spot	called
themarecrisium(latinma-reseameasureitslengththelargecratertothe
northwest	ofthe	apenninesis	called	archimedes.	measureits	diameter	bothinthe	map
and	in	the	photograph	(fig.	55),	and	see	how	the	two	results	agree.	the	true	diameter	of
this	crater,	east	and	west,	is	very	approximately	50	miles.	the	great	smooth	surface	to	the
westofarchimedesisthemareimbriumisitlargerorsmallerthanlakesuperior?
fig.	57	is	from	a	photograph	of	the	mare	imbrium,	and	the	amount	of	detail	here	shown	at
the	bottom	of	the	sea	is	a	sufficient	indication	that,	in	this	case	at	least,	the	water	has	been
drawn	off,	if	indeed	any	was	ever	present.
figisarepresentationofthe	mare	crisiumatatime	whennight	wasbeginningto
encroach	uponits	eastern	border,	anditserves	wellto	show	therugged	character	ofthe
ring-shaped	wall	which	incloses	this	area.
with	these	pictures	of	the	smoother	parts	of	the	moon’s	surface	we	may	compare	fig.	59,
whichshowsaregionnearthenorthpoleofthemoonandfiggivinganearly
morningviewofarchimedesandtheapenninesnotehowlongandsharparethe
shadows.
fig.	59.—illustrating	the	rugged	character	of	the	moon’s	surface.—nasmyth	and
carpenter.	fig.	59.—illustrating	the	rugged	character	of	the	moon’s	surface.
—nasmyth	and	carpenter.
103.	the	moon’s	atmosphere.—uponthe	earththesun	casts	no	shadows	sosharp	and
black	as	those	of	fig.	60,	because	his	rays	are	here	scattered	and	reflected	in	all	directions
bythedustandvaporsoftheatmospheresothattheplacefromwhichdirect
sunlightiscutoffisatleastpartiallyilluminedbythisreflectedlighttheshadowsof
fig.	60	show	that	upon	the	moon	it	must	be	otherwise,	and	suggest	that	ifthe	moon	has
any	atmosphere	whatever,	its	density	must	be	utterly	insignificant	in	comparison	with	that
of	the	earth.	in	its	motion	around	the	earth	the	moon	frequently	eclipses	stars	(occultsis
the	technical	word),	and	if	the	moon	had	an	atmosphere	such	as	is	shown	in	figthe
light	from	the	star	a	must	shine	through	this	atmosphere	just	before	the	moon’s	advancing
body	cuts	it	off,	and	it	must	be	refracted	by	the	atmosphere	so	that	the	star	would	appear	in
a	slightly	different	direction	(nearer	to	b)	than	before.	the	earth’s	atmosphere	refracts	the
starlight	under	such	circumstances	by	more	than	a	degree,	but	no	one	has	been	able	to	find
in	the	case	of	the	moon	any	effect	of	this	kind	amounting	to	even	a	fraction	of	a	second	of
arcwhilethishardlyjustifiesthestatementsometimesmadethatthemoonhasno
atmosphere,	we	shall	be	entirely	safein	sayingthatifit	has	one	at	allits	densityisless
than	a	thousandth	part	of	that	of	the	earth’s	atmosphere.	quite	in	keeping	with	this	absence
ofanatmosphereisthefactthatcloudsneverfloatoverthesurfaceofthemoonits
features	always	stand	out	hard	and	clear,	without	any	of	that	haze	and	softness	of	outline
which	our	atmosphere	introduces	into	all	terrestrial	landscapes.
fig.	60.—archimedes	and	apennines.	nasmyth	and	carpenter.	fig.	60.—archimedes
and	apennines.	nasmyth	and	carpenter.
104.	height	of	the	lunar	mountains.—attention	has	already	been	called	to	the	detached
mountainpeaks,	whichinfigprolongtherangeof	apenninesintothelunarnight.
thesearethe	beginnings	ofthe	caucasus	mountainsandfromthe	photograph	we	may
measure	as	follows	the	height	to	which	they	rise	above	the	surrounding	level	of	the	moon:
fig.	62	represents	a	part	ofthelunar	surface	along	the	boundaryline	between	night	and
day,	the	horizontal	line	at	the	top	of	the	figure	representing	a	level	ray	of	sunlight	which
justtouchesthemoonattandbarelyilluminatesthetopofthemountain,	mwhose
height,	histo	be	determined.	if	we	let	r	stand	forthe	radius	ofthe	moon	and	sforthe
distance,	t	m,	we	shall	have	in	the	right-angled	triangle	m	t	c,
r2	+	s2	=	(r	+	h)2,
and	we	need	only	to	measure	s—that	is,	the	distance	from	the	terminator	to	the	detached
mountain	peak—to	make	this	equation	determine	h,	since	r	is	already	known,	being	half
the	diameter	of	the	moon—1,081	miles.	practically	it	is	more	convenient	to	use	instead	of
this	equation	anotherform,	whichthestudent	whoisexpertinalgebra	mayshowto	be
very	nearly	equivalent	to	it:
h	(miless2	/	2163,
or	h	(feet2.44	s2.
fig.	61.—occultations	and	the	moon’s	atmosphere.	fig.	61.—occultations	and	the
moon’s	atmosphere.
the	distance	s	must	be	expressed	in	miles	in	all	of	these	equations.	in	fig.	55	the	distance
from	the	terminator	to	the	first	detached	peak	of	the	caucasus	mountains	is	1.7	millimeters
=	52	miles,	from	which	we	find	the	height	of	the	mountain	to	be	1.25	miles,	or	6,600	feet.
fig.	62.—determining	the	height	of	a	lunar	mountain.	fig.	62.—determining	the
height	of	a	lunar	mountain.
twothingshoweverneedtobeborneinmindinthisconnectionontheearthwe
measure	the	heights	of	mountains	above	sea	level,	while	on	the	moon	there	is	no	sea,	and
our	6,600	feet	is	simply	the	height	of	the	mountain	top	above	the	level	of	that	particular
point	in	the	terminator,	from	which	we	measure	its	distance.	so	too	it	is	evident	from	the
appearance	ofthingsthatthesunlightinstead	ofjusttouchingthetop	ofthe	particular
mountain	whose	height	we	have	measured,	really	extends	some	little	distance	down	from
itssummitandthefeetisthereforetheelevationofthelowestpointonthe
mountainstowhichthesunlightreachesthepeakitselfmaybeseveralhundredfeet
higher,	and	our	photograph	must	be	taken	at	the	exact	moment	when	this	peak	appears	in
thelunar	morning	ordisappearsintheeveningif	weareto	measurethealtitudeofthe
mountain’ssummitmeasuretheheightofthemostnorthernvisiblemountainofthe
caucasus	range.	this	is	one	of	the	outlying	spurs	of	the	great	mountain	calippus,	whose
principal	peak,	19,000	feet	high,	is	shown	in	fig.	55	as	the	brightest	part	of	the	caucasus
range.
the	highest	peak	of	the	lunar	apennines,	huyghens,	has	an	altitude	of	18,000	feet,	and	the
leibnitz	and	doerfel	mountains,	near	the	south	pole	of	the	moon,	reach	an	altitude	50	per
cent	greater	than	this,	and	are	probably	the	highest	peaks	on	the	moon.	this	falls	very	little
short	ofthe	highest	mountain	onthe	earth,	althoughthe	moonis	much	smallerthanthe
earth,	and	these	mountains	are	considerably	higher	than	anything	on	the	western	continent
of	the	earth.
thevaguenessofoutlineoftheterminatormakesitdifficulttomeasurefromitwith
precision,	and	somewhat	more	accurate	determinations	of	the	heights	of	lunar	mountains
can	be	obtained	by	measuring	the	length	of	the	shadows	which	they	cast,	and	the	depths	of
craters	may	also	be	measured	by	means	of	the	shadows	which	fall	into	them.
105.	craters.—figshowsatypicallunarcraterandconveysagoodideaofthe
ruggednessofthelunarlandscapecomparetheappearanceofthiscraterwiththe
following	generalizations,	which	are	based	upon	the	accurate	measurement	of	many	such:
aacraterisarealdepressioninthesurfaceofthemoonsurroundedusuallybyan
elevated	ring	which	rises	above	the	general	level	of	the	region	outside,	while	the	bottom	of
the	crater	is	about	an	equal	distance	below	that	level.
b.	cratersareshallowtheir	diametersrangingfromfivetimesto	morethanfiftytimes
their	depth.	archimedes,	whose	diameter	we	found	to	be	50	miles,	has	an	average	depth	of
about	4,000	feet	below	the	crest	of	its	surrounding	wall,	and	is	relatively	a	shallow	crater.
fig.	63.—a	typical	lunar	crater.—nasmyth	and	carpenter.
fig.	63.—a	typical	lunar	crater.—nasmyth	and	carpenter.
c.	craters	frequently	have	one	or	more	hills	rising	within	them	which,	however,	rarely,	if
ever,	reach	up	to	the	level	of	the	surrounding	wall.
d.	whatever	may	have	beenthe	mode	oftheirformationthe	craters	can	not	have	been
produced	by	scooping	out	material	from	the	center	and	piling	it	up	to	make	the	wall,	for	in
three	cases	out	of	four	the	volume	of	the	excavation	is	greater	than	the	volume	of	material
contained	in	the	wall.
106.	moon	and	earth.—we	have	gone	far	enough	now	to	appreciate	both	the	likeness	and
the	unlikeness	of	the	moon	and	earth.	they	may	fairly	enough	be	likened	to	offspring	of
the	same	parent	who	have	followed	very	different	careers,	and	in	the	fullness	of	time	find
themselves	in	very	different	circumstances.	the	most	serious	point	of	difference	in	these
circumstancesistheatmospherewhichgivestotheearthawealthofphenomena
altogetherlackinginthemooncloudswindrainsnowdewfrostandhailareall
dependent	upon	the	atmosphere	and	can	not	be	found	where	it	is	not.	there	can	be	nothing
uponthe	moonatalllikethatgreatgroupofchangeswhichwecallweatherandthe
unruffledaspectofthe	moon’sfacecontrastssharply	withthesuccessionofcloudand
sunshine	which	the	earth	would	present	if	seen	from	the	moon.
the	atmosphereisthe	chief	agentinthe	propagation	of	sound,	and	withoutitthe	moon
must	be	wrapped	in	silence	more	absolute	than	can	be	found	upon	the	surface	of	the	earth.
sotootheabsence	ofanatmosphereshowsthattherecan	be	no	waterorotherliquid
upon	the	moon,	for	if	so	it	would	immediately	evaporate	and	produce	a	gaseous	envelope
which	we	have	seen	does	not	exist.	with	air	and	water	absentthere	can	be	of	course	no
vegetation	or	life	of	any	kind	upon	the	moon,	and	we	are	compelled	to	regard	it	as	an	arid
desert,	utterly	waste.
107.	temperature	of	the	moon.—a	characteristic	feature	of	terrestrial	deserts,	which	is
possessedinexaggerateddegreebythemoonisthegreatextremesoftemperatureto
whichtheyanditaresubject.	owingtoitsslowrotationaboutitsaxisapointonthe
moon	receivesthe	solarradiation	uninterruptedly	for	morethan	afortnight,	andthattoo
unmitigated	by	any	cloud	or	vaporous	covering.	then	for	a	like	period	itisturned	away
from	the	sun	and	allowed	to	cool	off,	radiating	into	interplanetary	space	without	hindrance
its	accumulated	store	of	heat.	it	is	easy	to	see	that	the	range	of	temperature	between	day
and	night	must	be	much	greater	under	these	circumstances	than	it	is	with	us	where	shorter
days	and	clouded	skies	render	day	and	night	more	nearly	alike,	to	say	nothing	of	the	ocean
whose	waters	serve	as	a	great	balance	wheel	for	equalizing	temperatures.	just	how	hot	or
how	cold	the	moon	becomes	is	hard	to	determine,	and	very	different	estimates	are	to	be
foundinthebooksperhapsthemostreliableofthesearefurnishedbytherecent
researchesofprofessorverywhoseexperimentsleadhimtoconcludethat“itsrocky
surface	at	midday,	in	latitudes	where	the	sun	is	high,	is	probably	hotter	than	boiling	water
and	only	the	most	terrible	of	earth’s	deserts,	where	the	burning	sands	blister	the	skin,	and
men,	beasts,	and	birds	drop	dead,	can	approach	a	noontide	on	the	cloudless	surface	of	our
satellite.	only	the	extreme	polar	latitudes	of	the	moon	can	have	an	endurable	temperature
bydaytosaynothingofthenightwhenweshouldhavetobecometroglodytesto
preserve	ourselves	from	such	intense	cold.”
while	the	night	temperature	of	the	moon,	even	very	soon	after	sunset,	sinks	to	something
like	200°	below	zero	on	the	centigrade	scale,	or	320°	below	zero	on	the	fahrenheit	scale,
thelowest	knowntemperature	uponthe	earth,	accordingto	general	greelyis	90°	fahr.
below	zero,	recorded	in	siberia	in	january,	1885.
winterandsummer	are	not	markedly	different	uponthe	moonsinceitsrotation	axisis
nearly	perpendicular	to	the	plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit	about	the	sun,	and	the	sun	never	goes
farnorthorsouthofthe	moon’sequatorthe	monthistheonecycle	within	whichall
seasonal	changes	in	its	physical	condition	appear	to	run	their	complete	course.
108.	changesinthe	moon.—itisevidentlyidletolookforanysuchchangesinthe
condition	of	the	moon’s	surface	as	with	us	mark	the	progress	of	the	seasons	or	the	spread
of	civilization	overthe	wilderness.	but	minor	changesthere	may	be,	andit	would	seem
that	the	violent	oscillations	of	temperature	from	day	to	night	ought	to	have	some	effect	in
breaking	down	and	crumbling	the	sharp	peaks	and	crags	which	are	there	so	common	and
so	pronounced.	for	a	century	past	astronomers	have	searched	carefully	for	changes	of	this
kind—the	filling	up	of	some	crater	or	the	fall	of	a	mountain	peak;	but	while	some	things
of	this	kind	have	been	reported	from	time	to	time,	the	evidence	in	their	behalf	has	not	been
altogether	conclusive.	at	the	present	time	itis	an	open	question	whether	changes	of	this
sort	large	enough	to	be	seen	from	the	earth	are	in	progress.	a	crater	much	less	than	a	mile
wide	can	be	seen	in	the	telescope,	but	it	is	not	easy	to	tell	whether	so	minute	an	object	has
changed	in	size	or	shape	during	a	year	or	a	decade,	and	even	if	changes	are	seen	they	may
be	apparent	ratherthan	real.	fig.	64	containstwo	views	ofthe	crater	archimedestaken
underamorningandanafternoonsunrespectivelyandshowsaverypronounced
difference	between	the	two	which	proceeds	solely	from	a	difference	of	illumination.	in	the
presence	of	suchlarge	fictitious	changes	astronomers	are	slow	to	accept	smaller	ones	as
real.
fig.	64.—archimedes	in	the	lunar	morning	and	afternoon.—weinek.
fig.	64.—archimedes	in	the	lunar	morning	and	afternoon.—weinek.
it	is	this	absence	of	change	that	is	responsible	for	the	rugged	and	sharp-cut	features	of	the
moon	which	continue	substantially	as	they	were	made,	while	upon	the	earth	rain	and	frost
arecontinuallywearingdownthemountainsandspreadingtheirsubstanceuponthe
lowland	in	an	unending	process	of	smoothing	off	the	roughnesses	of	its	surface.	upon	the
moon	this	process	is	almost	if	not	wholly	wanting,	and	the	moon	abides	to-day	much	more
like	its	primitive	condition	than	is	the	earth.
109.	the	moon’s	influence	upon	the	earth.—there	is	a	widespread	popular	belief	that	in
many	waysthe	moonexercisesaconsiderableinfluenceuponterrestrialaffairsthatit
affects	the	weather	for	good	or	ill,	that	crops	must	be	planted	and	harvested,	pigs	must	be
killed,	and	timber	cut	at	the	right	time	of	the	moon,	etc.	our	common	word	lunatic	means
moonstruck—i.	e.,	one	upon	whom	the	moon	has	shone	while	sleeping.	there	is	notthe
slightest	scientific	basis	for	any	of	these	beliefs,	and	astronomers	everywhere	class	them
withtalesofwitchcraftmagicandpopulardelusionforthemostpartthemoon’s
influenceupontheearthislimitedtothelightwhichitsendsandtheeffectofits
gravitation,	chiefly	exhibited	in	the	ocean	tides.	we	receive	from	the	moon	a	very	small
amountofsecond-handsolarheatandthereisalsoatriflingmagneticinfluencebut
neither	of	these	last	effects	comes	within	the	range	of	ordinary	observation,	and	we	shall
not	gofar	wrongin	sayingthatsavethe	moonlight	andthetides,	every	supposedlunar
influence	upon	the	earth	is	either	fictitious	or	too	small	to	be	readily	detected.

chapter	x
the	sun
110.	dependenceoftheearthuponthesun.—thereisnobetterintroductiontothe
study	of	the	sun	than	byron’s	ode	to	darkness,	beginning	with	the	lines—
“i	dreamed	a	dream
that	was	not	all	a	dream.
the	bright	sun	was	extinguished,”
andproceedingtodepictinvivid	wordstheconsequencesofthisextinctionthe	most
matter-of-factlanguageofscienceagreeswiththewordsofthepoetindeclaringthe
earth’s	dependence	upon	the	sun	for	all	those	varied	forms	of	energy	which	make	it	a	fit
abode	for	living	beings.	the	winds	blow	and	the	rivers	run;	the	crops	grow,	are	gathered
andconsumedbyvirtueofthesolarenergyfactorylocomotivebeastbirdandthe
humanbodyfurnishtypesofmachinesrunbyenergyderivedfromthesunandthe
student	willfind	it	aninstructive	exerciseto	search	for	kinds	ofterrestrial	energy	which
are	not	derived	either	directly	or	indirectly	from	the	sun.	there	are	a	few	such,	but	they	are
neither	numerous	nor	important.
111.	the	sun’s	distance	from	the	earth.—to	the	astronomer	the	sun	presents	problems
ofthehighestconsequenceandapparentlyofverydiversecharacterbutalltending
toward	the	same	goal:	the	framing	of	a	mechanical	explanation	of	the	sun	considered	as	a
machine;	whatitisandhowitdoesits	workintheforefrontoftheseproblemsstand
thosenumericaldeterminationsofdistancesizemassdensityetcwhichwehave
already	encountered	in	connection	with	the	moon,	but	which	must	here	be	dealt	with	in	a
different	manner,	because	the	immensely	greater	distance	of	the	sun	makes	impossible	the
resort	to	any	such	simple	method	as	the	triangle	used	for	determining	the	moon’s	distance.
itwouldbelikedeterminingthedistanceofasteepleamileawaybyobservingits
direction	first	from	one	eye,	then	from	the	other;	too	short	a	base	for	the	triangle.	in	one
respect,	however,	we	stand	upon	a	better	footing	than	in	the	case	of	the	moon,	for	the	mass
of	the	earth	has	already	been	found	(chapter	iv)	as	a	fractional	part	of	the	sun’s	mass,	and
we	have	onlytoinvertthe	fractionin	ordertofindthatthe	sun’s	massistimes
that	of	the	earth	and	moon	combined,	or	333,000	times	that	of	the	earth	alone.
ifwecouldrelyimplicitlyuponthisnumberwemightmakeitdetermineforusthe
distance	of	the	sun	through	the	law	of	gravitation	as	follows:	it	was	suggested	in	§	38	that
newton	proved	kepler’s	three	laws	to	be	imperfect	corollaries	from	the	law	of	gravitation,
requiring	a	little	amendment	to	make	them	strictly	correct,	and	below	we	give	in	the	form
of	an	equation	kepler’s	statement	of	the	third	law	together	with	newton’s	amendment	of
it.	in	these	equations—
t	=	periodic	time	of	any	planet;
a	=	one	half	the	major	axis	of	its	orbit;
m	=	its	mass;
m	=	the	mass	of	the	sun;
k	=	the	gravitation	constant	corresponding	to	the	particular	set	of	units	in	which	t,	a,	m,
and	m	are	expressed.
(kepler)	a3/t2	=	h;	(newton)	a3/t2	=	k	(m	+	m).
kepler’s	idea	was:	for	every	planet	which	moves	around	the	sun,	a3	divided	by	t2	always
givesthesame	quotient,	hand	he	did	not	concern	himself	withthesignificance	ofthis
quotientfurtherthanto	notethatifthe	particular	a	and	t	which	belongto	any	planet—
egtheearth—betakenastheunitsoflengthandtimethenthequotientwillbe1.
newton,	on	the	other	hand,	attached	a	meaning	to	the	quotient,	and	showed	that	it	is	equal
tothe	product	obtained	by	multiplyingthe	sum	ofthetwo	masses,	planet	and	sun,	by	a
numberwhichisalwaysthesame	when	wearedealing	withtheactionofgravitation,
whether	it	be	between	the	sun	and	planet,	or	between	moon	and	earth,	or	between	the	earth
and	a	roast	of	beef	in	the	butcher’s	scales,	provided	only	that	we	use	always	the	same	units
with	which	to	measure	times,	distances,	and	masses.
numerically,	newton’s	correction	to	kepler’s	third	law	does	not	amount	to	much	in	the
motion	oftheplanetsjupiter,	whichshowsthegreatesteffect,	makesthecircuitofhis
orbit	in	4,333	days	instead	of	4,335,	which	it	would	require	if	kepler’s	law	were	strictly
true.	but	in	another	respect	the	change	is	of	the	utmost	importance,	since	it	enables	us	to
extend	kepler’slawwhichrelatessolelytothesunanditsplanetstootherattracting
bodies,	such	as	the	earth,	moon,	and	stars.	thus	forthe	moon’s	motion	around	the	earth
we	write—
(240,000)3/(27.32)2	=	k	(1	+	1/81),
from	which	we	may	find	that,	with	the	units	here	employed,	the	earth’s	mass	as	the	unit	of
mass,	the	mean	solar	day	as	the	unit	of	time,	and	the	mile	as	the	unit	of	distance—
k	=	1830	×	1010.
ifweintroducethisvalueofkintothecorrespondingequationwhichrepresentsthe
motion	of	the	earth	around	the	sun,	we	shall	have—
a3/(365.25)2	=	1830	×	1010	(333,000	+	1),
where	the	large	number	in	the	parenthesis	represents	the	number	of	times	the	mass	of	the
sun	is	greater	than	the	mass	of	the	earth.	we	shall	find	by	solving	this	equation	that	a,	the
mean	distance	of	the	sun	from	the	earth,	is	very	approximately	93,000,000	miles.
113.	another	method	of	determining	the	sun’s	distance.—this	will	be	best	appreciated
by	a	reference	to	fig.	17.	it	appears	here	that	the	earth	makes	its	nearest	approach	to	the
orbitofmarsinthemonthofaugustandifinanyaugustmarshappenstobein
opposition,	its	distance	from	the	earth	will	be	very	much	less	than	the	distance	of	the	sun
from	the	earth,	and	may	be	measured	by	methods	not	unlikethose	which	served	forthe
moon.	if	now	the	orbits	of	mars	and	the	earth	were	circles	having	their	centers	at	the	sun
this	distance	between	them,	which	we	may	represent	by	d,	would	be	the	difference	of	the
radii	of	these	orbits—
d	=	a”	-	a’,
wheretheaccentsrepresentmarsandtheearthrespectivelykepler’sthirdlaw
furnishes	the	relation—
(a”)3/(t”)2	=	(a’)3/(t’)2;
and	since	the	periodic	times	of	the	earth	and	mars,	t’,	t”,	are	known	to	a	high	degree	of
accuracy,	these	two	equations	are	sufficient	to	determine	the	two	unknown	quantities,	a’,
a”—i.	ethe	distance	of	the	sun	from	mars	as	well	as	from	the	earth.	the	first	of	these
equations	is,	of	course,	not	strictly	true,	on	account	of	the	elliptical	shape	of	the	orbits,	but
this	can	be	allowed	for	easily	enough.
in	practice	it	is	found	better	to	apply	this	method	of	determining	the	sun’s	distance	through
observations	of	an	asteroid	ratherthan	observations	of	mars,	and	greatinterest	has	been
arousedamongastronomersbythediscoveryinofanasteroidorplaneteros,
which	at	times	comes	much	closer	to	the	earth	than	does	mars	or	any	other	heavenly	body
exceptthemoonandwhichwillatfutureoppositionsfurnishamoreaccurate
determinationofthesun’sdistancethananyhithertoavailableobservationsforthis
purpose	are	being	made	at	the	present	time	(october,	1900).
many	other	methods	of	measuring	the	sun’s	distance	have	been	devised	by	astronomers,
someofthemextremelyingeniousandinterestingbuteveryoneofthemhasits	weak
point—e.	g.,	the	determination	of	the	mass	of	the	earth	in	the	first	method	given	above	and
the	measurement	of	dinthe	second	method,	sothat	eventhe	bestresults	at	present	are
uncertain	to	the	extent	of	200,000	miles	or	more,	and	astronomers,	instead	of	relying	upon
any	one	method,	must	use	all	of	them,	and	take	an	average	of	their	results.	according	to
professor	harkness,	this	average	value	is	92,796,950	miles,	and	it	seems	certain	that	a	line
of	this	length	drawn	from	the	earth	toward	the	sun	would	end	somewhere	within	the	body
of	the	sun,	but	whether	on	the	nearer	or	the	farther	side	of	the	center,	or	exactly	at	it,	no
man	knows.
114.	parallax	and	distance.—itisquitecustomaryamongastronomerstospeak	ofthe
sun’s	parallax,	instead	of	its	distance	from	the	earth,	meaning	by	parallax	its	difference	of
direction	as	seen	from	the	center	and	surface	of	the	earth—i.	e.,	the	angle	subtended	at	the
sun	by	a	radius	of	the	earth	placed	at	right	angles	to	the	line	of	sight.	the	greater	the	sun’s
distance	the	smaller	will	this	angle	be,	and	it	therefore	makes	a	substitute	for	the	distance
which	has	the	advantage	of	being	represented	by	a	small	number,	8”.8,	instead	of	a	large
one.
the	books	abound	with	illustrations	intended	to	help	the	reader	comprehend	how	great	is	a
distance	of	93,000,000	miles,	but	a	single	one	of	these	must	suffice	here.	to	ride	100	miles
a	day	365	days	in	the	year	would	be	counted	a	good	bicycling	record,	but	the	rider	who
started	at	the	beginning	of	the	christian	era	and	rode	at	that	rate	toward	the	sun	from	the
year1	a.	ddowntothepresent	moment	wouldnotyethavereachedhisdestination,
although	his	journey	would	be	about	three	quarters	done.	he	would	have	crossed	the	orbit
of	venus	about	the	time	of	charlemagne,	and	that	of	mercury	soon	after	the	discovery	of
america.
115.	size	and	density	ofthesun.—knowingthedistanceofthesunitiseasytofind
fromtheanglesubtendedbyitsdiameterminutesofarcthatthelengthofthat
diameteris	865,000	miles.	werecallinthisconnectionthatthe	diameter	ofthe	moon’s
orbit	is	only	480,000	miles,	but	little	more	than	half	the	diameter	of	the	sun,	thus	affording
abundantroominsidethesunandtospareforthemoontoperformthemonthly
revolution	about	its	orbit,	as	shown	in	fig.	65.
fig.	65.—the	sun’s	size.—young.	fig.	65.—the	sun’s	size.—young.
inthesamemannerinwhichthedensityofthemoonwasfoundfromitsmassand
diameter,	the	student	may	find	from	the	mass	and	diameter	of	the	sun	given	above	that	its
mean	density	is	1.4	times	that	of	water.	this	is	about	the	same	as	the	density	of	gravel	or
soft	coal,	and	is	just	about	one	quarter	of	the	average	density	of	the	earth.
we	recall	that	the	small	density	of	the	moon	was	accounted	for	by	the	diminished	weight
of	objects	upon	it,	but	this	explanation	can	not	hold	in	the	case	of	the	sun,	for	not	only	is
thedensitylessbuttheforceofgravity(weightistheretimesasgreatasuponthe
earth.	the	athlete	who	here	weighs	175	poundsiftransportedtothesurface	ofthesun
would	weigh	more	than	an	elephant	does	here,	and	would	find	his	bones	break	under	his
ownweightifhismuscleswerestrongenoughtoholdhimuprightthetremendous
pressure	exerted	by	gravity	at	the	surface	of	the	sun	must	be	surpassed	below	the	surface,
and	as	it	does	not	pack	the	materialtogether	and	make	it	dense,	we	are	driven	to	one	of
two	conclusions:	either	the	stuff	of	which	the	sun	is	made	is	altogether	unlike	that	of	the
earth,	not	so	readily	compressed	by	pressure,	or	there	is	some	opposing	influence	at	work
which	more	than	balances	the	effect	of	gravity	and	makes	the	solar	stuff	much	lighter	than
the	terrestrial.
116.	materialofwhichthesunismade.—astothefirstofthesealternativesthe
spectroscope	comes	to	our	aid	and	shows	in	the	sun’s	spectrum	(fig.	50)	the	characteristic
line	marked	d,	which	we	know	always	indicates	the	presence	of	sodium	and	identifies	at
leastoneterrestrialsubstanceaspresentinthesuninconsiderablequantitythelines
marked	c	and	f	are	produced	by	hydrogen,	which	is	one	ofthe	constituents	of	water,	e
shows	calcium	to	be	present	in	the	sun,	b	magnesium,	etc.	in	this	way	it	has	been	shown
thataboutonehalfofourterrestrialelements,	mainlythe	metalliconesarepresentas
gases	on	or	near	the	sun’s	surface,	but	it	must	not	be	inferred	that	elements	not	found	in
thiswayareabsentfromthesuntheymaybethereprobablyaretherebutthe
spectroscopic	proof	of	their	presence	is	more	difficult	to	obtain.	professor	rowland,	who
has	been	prominent	in	the	study	of	the	solar	spectrum,	says:	“were	the	whole	earth	heated
to	the	temperature	of	the	sun,	its	spectrum	would	probably	resemble	that	of	the	sun	very
closely.”
some	of	the	common	terrestrial	elements	found	in	the	sun	are:
aluminium.
calcium.
carbon.
copper.
hydrogen.
iron.
lead.
nickel.
potassium.
silicon.
silver.
sodium.
tin.
zinc.
oxygen	(?)
whateverdifferencesofchemicalstructure	mayexistbetweenthesunandtheearthit
seemsthatwemustregardthesebodiesasmorelikethanunliketoeachotherin
substance,	and	we	are	brought	back	to	the	second	of	our	alternatives:	there	must	be	some
influence	opposing	the	force	of	gravity	and	making	the	substance	of	the	sun	light	instead
of	heavy,	and	we	need	not	seek	far	to	find	it	in—
117.	the	heat	of	the	sun.—that	the	sun	is	hot	is	too	evident	to	require	proof,	and	it	is	a
familiar	fact	that	heat	expands	most	substances	and	makes	them	less	dense.	the	sun’s	heat
falling	upon	the	earth	expands	it	and	diminishes	its	density	in	some	small	degree,	and	we
haveonlytoimaginethisprocessofexpansioncontinueduntiltheearth’sdiameter
becomes	58	per	centlargerthanit	nowistofindthe	earth’s	densityreducedto	alevel
with	that	of	the	sun.	just	how	much	the	temperature	of	the	earth	must	be	raised	to	produce
this	amount	of	expansion	we	do	not	know,	neither	do	we	know	accurately	the	temperature
of	the	sun,	but	there	can	be	no	doubt	that	heat	is	the	cause	of	the	sun’s	low	density	and	that
the	corresponding	temperature	is	very	high.
before	we	inquire	more	closely	into	the	sun’s	temperature,	it	will	be	well	to	draw	a	sharp
distinction	betweenthetwoterms	heat	andtemperature,	which	are	often	used	asifthey
meant	the	same	thing.	heat	is	a	form	of	energy	which	may	be	found	in	varying	degree	in
every	substance,	whether	warm	or	cold—a	block	of	ice	contains	a	considerable	amount	of
heat—whiletemperature	correspondsto	oursensations	of	warm	and	cold,	and	measures
the	extent	to	which	heat	is	concentrated	in	the	body.	it	is	the	amount	of	heat	per	molecule
of	the	body.	a	barrel	of	warm	water	contains	more	heat	than	the	flame	of	a	match,	but	its
temperature	is	not	so	high.	bearing	in	mind	this	distinction,	we	seek	to	determine	not	the
amount	of	heat	contained	in	the	sun	but	the	sun’s	temperature,	and	this	involves	the	same
difficulty	as	does	the	question,	what	is	the	temperature	of	a	locomotive?	it	is	one	thing	in
the	fire	box	and	another	thing	in	the	driving	wheels,	and	still	another	at	the	headlight;	and
so	withthe	sunitstemperatureis	certainly	differentin	different	parts—onething	atthe
center	and	another	at	the	surface.	even	those	parts	which	we	see	are	covered	by	a	veil	of
gaseswhichproducebyabsorptionthedarklinesofthesolarspectrumandseriously
interferebothwiththeemissionofenergyfromthesunandwithourattemptsat
measuring	the	temperature	of	those	parts	of	the	surface	from	which	that	energy	streams.
inviewoftheseandotherdifficultiesweneednotbesurprisedthatthewildest
discordancehasbeenfoundinestimatesofthesolartemperaturemadebydifferent
investigatorswhohaveassignedtoitvaluesrangingfromctomorethan
5,000,000°	c.	quiterecently,	howeverimproved	methods	and	a	better	understanding	of
the	problem	have	brought	about	a	better	agreement	of	results,	and	it	now	seems	probable
that	the	temperature	of	the	visible	surface	of	the	sun	lies	somewhere	between	5,000°	and
10,000°	c.,	say	15,000°	of	the	fahrenheit	scale.
118.	determining	the	sun’s	temperature.—one	ingenious	method	which	has	been	used
fordeterminingthistemperatureisbasedupontheprinciplestatedabovethatevery
object,	whether	warm	or	cold,	contains	heat	and	gives	it	off	in	the	form	of	radiant	energy.
theradiationfromabodywhosetemperatureislowerthancismadeup
exclusivelyofenergywhosewavelengthisgreaterthantenthmetersandis
therefore	invisible	to	the	eye,	although	a	thermometer	or	even	the	human	hand	can	often
detect	it	as	radiant	heat.	a	brick	wall	in	the	summer	sunshine	gives	off	energy	which	can
be	felt	as	heat	but	can	not	be	seen.	when	such	a	body	is	further	heated	it	continues	to	send
offthesamekinds(wavelengthsofenergyasbeforebutnewandshorter	wavesare
addedtoitsradiation,	and	whenit	beginsto	emit	energy	of	wavelength	7,500	or	7,600
tenth	meters,	it	also	begins	to	shine	with	a	dull-red	light,	which	presently	becomes	brighter
andlessruddy	and	changesto	white	asthetemperaturerisesand	waves	ofstillshorter
length	are	thereby	added	to	the	radiation.	we	say,	in	common	speech,	the	body	becomes
first	red	hot	and	then	white	hot,	and	we	thus	recognize	in	a	general	way	that	the	kind	or
color	of	the	radiation	which	a	body	gives	off	is	an	index	to	its	temperature.	the	greater	the
proportion	of	energy	of	short	wave	lengths	the	higher	is	the	temperature	of	the	radiating
bodyinsunlightthe	maximum	ofbrilliancytotheeyeliesatornearthe	wavelengthtenth	metersbutthe	greatestintensity	ofradiation	ofallkinds(lightincludedis
estimated	to	fall	somewhere	between	green	and	blue	in	the	spectrum	at	or	near	the	wave
lengthtenthmetersandifwecanapplytothiswavelengthpaschen’slaw—
temperature	reckoned	in	degrees	centigrade	from	the	absolute	zero	is	always	equal	to	the
quotient	obtained	by	dividing	the	number	27,000,000	by	the	wave	length	corresponding	to
maximumradiation—weshallfindatoncefortheabsolutetemperatureofthesun’s
surface	5,400°	c.
paschen’s	law	has	been	shown	to	hold	true,	at	least	approximately,	for	lower	temperatures
and	longer	wave	lengths	than	are	here	involved,	but	as	it	is	not	yet	certain	that	it	is	strictly
trueandholdsforalltemperaturestoogreatreliancemustnotbeattachedtothe
numerical	result	furnished	by	it.
fig.	66.—the	sun,	august	11,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
fig.	66.—the	sun,	august	11,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
fig.	67.—the	sun,	august	14,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
fig.	67.—the	sun,	august	14,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
119.	the	sun’s	surface.—a	marked	contrast	exists	between	the	faces	of	sun	and	moon	in
respect	of	the	amount	of	detail	to	be	seen	upon	them,	the	sun	showing	nothing	whatever	to
correspond	with	the	mountains,	craters,	and	seas	of	the	moon.	the	unaided	eye	in	general
finds	in	the	sun	only	a	blank	bright	circle	as	smooth	and	unmarked	as	the	surface	of	still
waterandeventhetelescopeatfirstsightseemstoshowbutlittlemoretheremay
usually	be	found	upon	the	sun’s	face	a	certain	number	of	black	patches	called	sun	spots,
such	as	are	shown	in	figsto	69,	and	occasionallythese	arelarge	enoughto	be	seen
through	a	smoked	glass	without	the	aid	of	a	telescope.	when	seen	near	the	edge	of	the	sun
theyarequitefrequentlyaccompaniedasinfigbyvaguepatchescalledfaculæ
(latin,	facula	=	a	little	torch),	which	look	a	little	brighter	than	the	surrounding	parts	of	the
sun.	so,	too,	a	good	photograph	of	the	sun	usually	shows	that	the	central	parts	of	the	disk
areratherbrighterthantheedgeasindeedweshouldexpectthemtobesincethe
absorption	lines	in	the	sun’s	spectrum	have	already	taught	us	that	the	visible	surface	of	the
sun	is	enveloped	by	invisible	vapors	which	in	some	measure	absorb	the	emitted	light	and
renderitfeebler	atthe	edge	whereit	passesthrough	a	greaterthickness	ofthis	envelope
than	at	the	center.	see	fig.	70,	where	it	is	shown	that	the	energy	coming	from	the	edge	of
thesuntothe	earth	hastotraverse	a	muchlonger	pathinsidethe	vaporsthan	doesthat
coming	from	the	center.
fig.	68.—the	sun,	august	18,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
fig.	68.—the	sun,	august	18,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
examine	the	sun	spots	in	the	four	photographs,	figs.	66	to	69,	and	note	that	the	two	spots
whichappearattheextremeleftofthefirstphotographverymuchdistortedand
foreshortenedbythecurvatureofthesun’ssurfaceareseeninadifferentpartofthe
second	picture,	and	are	not	only	more	conspicuous	but	show	better	their	true	shape.
plate	ii.	the	equatorial	constellations
plate	ii.	the	equatorial	constellations
120.	the	sun’s	rotation.—the	changed	position	of	these	spots	shows	that	the	sun	rotates
about	an	axis	at	right	angles	to	the	direction	of	the	spot’s	motion,	and	the	position	of	this
axis	is	shown	in	the	figure	by	a	faint	line	ruled	obliquely	across	the	face	of	the	sun	nearly
north	and	south	in	each	of	the	four	photographs.	this	rotation	in	the	space	of	three	days
hascarriedthespotsfromtheedgehalfwaytothecenterofthediskandthestudent
shouldnotetheprogressofthespotsinthetwolaterphotographsthatof	august21st
showing	them	just	ready	to	disappear	around	the	farther	edge	of	the	sun.
fig.	69.—the	sun,	august	21,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
fig.	69.—the	sun,	august	21,	1894.	photographed	at	the	goodsell	observatory.
plotaccuratelyinoneofthesefiguresthepositionsofthespotsasshownintheother
three,	and	observe	whether	the	path	of	the	spots	across	the	sun’s	face	is	a	straight	line.	is
there	any	reason	why	it	should	not	be	straight?
these	four	pictures	may	be	made	to	illustrate	many	things	about	the	sun.	thus	the	sun’s
axis	is	not	parallel	to	that	of	the	earth,	for	the	letters	n	s	mark	the	direction	of	a	north	and
south	line	across	the	face	of	the	sun,	and	this	line,	of	course,	is	parallel	to	the	earth’s	axis,
while	it	is	evidently	not	parallel	to	the	sun’s	axis.	the	group	of	spots	took	more	than	ten
days	to	move	across	the	sun’s	face,	and	as	at	least	an	equal	time	must	be	required	to	move
aroundthe	oppositeside	ofthesunitisevidentthatthe	period	ofthesun’srotationis
something	more	than	20	days.	it	is,	in	fact,	rather	more	than	25	days,	for	this	same	group
of	spots	reappeared	again	on	the	left-hand	edge	of	the	sun	on	september	5th.
fig.	70.—absorption	at	the	sun’s	edge.	fig.	70.—absorption	at	the	sun’s	edge.
121.	sun	spots.—anothersignificantfactcomes	out	plainlyfromthe	photographs.	the
spots	are	not	permanent	features	of	the	sun’s	face,	since	they	changed	their	size	and	shape
veryappreciablyinthefewdayscoveredbythepicturescompareparticularlythe
photographs	of	august	14th	and	august	18th,	wherethespots	areleast	distorted	bythe
curvatureofthesun’ssurfacebyseptember16ththisgroupofspotshaddisappeared
absolutely	from	the	sun’s	face,	although	when	at	its	largest	the	group	extended	more	than
80,000	milesinlength,	and	several	oftheindividual	spots	werelarge	enough	to	contain
the	earth	if	it	had	been	dropped	upon	them.	from	fig.	67	determine	in	miles	the	length	of
the	group	on	august	14th.	fig.	71	shows	an	enlarged	view	of	these	spots	as	they	appeared
onaugust17thandinthiswefindsomedetailsnotsowellshowninthepreceding
picturesthelargerspotsconsistofablackpartcalledthenucleusorumbra(latin,
shadowwhichissurroundedbyanirregularbordercalledthepenumbra(partial
shadowwhichisintermediateinbrightnessbetweenthenucleusandthesurrounding
parts	of	the	sun.	it	should	not	be	inferred	from	the	picture	that	the	nucleus	is	really	black
or	even	dark.	it	shines,	in	fact,	with	a	brilliancy	greater	than	that	of	an	electric	lamp,	but
the	background	furnished	by	the	sun’s	surface	is	so	much	brighter	that	by	contrast	with	it
the	nucleus	and	penumbra	appear	relatively	dark.
fig.	71.—sun	spots,	august	17,	1894.	goodsell	observatory.
fig.	71.—sun	spots,	august	17,	1894.	goodsell	observatory.
fig.	72.—sun	spot	of	march	5,	1873.—from	langley,	the	new	astronomy.	by
permission	of	the	publishers.
fig.	72.—sun	spot	of	march	5,	1873.—from	langley,	the	new	astronomy.	by
permission	of	the	publishers.
thebrightshiningsurfaceofthesunthebackgroundforthespotsiscalledthe
photosphere(greeklightsphereandasfigshowsitassumesunderasuitable
magnifying	power	a	mottled	aspect	quite	different	from	the	featureless	expanse	shown	in
the	earlier	pictures.	the	photosphere	is,	in	fact,	a	layer	of	little	clouds	with	darker	spaces
between	them,	and	the	fine	detail	of	these	clouds,	their	complicated	structure,	and	the	way
in	which,	when	projected	against	the	background	of	a	sun	spot,	they	produce	its	penumbra,
areallbroughtoutinfignotethatthelittlepatchinonecornerofthispicture
represents	north	and	south	america	drawn	to	the	same	scale	as	the	sun	spots.
fig.	73.—spectroheliograph,	showing	distribution	of	faculæ	upon	the	sun.—hale.	fig.
73.—spectroheliograph,	showing	distribution	of	faculæ	upon	the	sun.—hale.
122.	faculæ.—we	haveseenin	figafew	ofthebrightspotscalledfaculæ.	atthe
telescopeorintheordinaryphotographthesecanbeseenonlyattheedgeofthesun,
because	elsewhere	the	background	furnished	by	the	photosphere	is	so	bright	that	they	are
lost	in	it.	it	is	possible,	however,	by	an	ingenious	application	of	the	spectroscope	to	break
upthesunlightintoaspectruminsuchawayastodiminishthebrightnessofthis
background,	much	more	than	the	brightness	of	the	faculæ	is	diminished,	and	in	this	way	to
obtain	a	photograph	of	the	sun’s	surface	which	shall	show	them	wherever	they	occur,	and
such	a	photograph,	showing	faintly	the	spectral	lines,	is	reproduced	in	fig.	73.	the	faculæ
arethebrightpatches	whichstretchinconspicuouslyacrossthefaceofthesunintwo
rather	irregular	belts	with	a	comparatively	empty	lane	between	them.	this	lane	lies	along
the	sun’s	equator,	and	it	is	upon	either	side	of	it	between	latitudes	5°	and	40°	that	faculæ
seemtobeproduceditissignificantoftheirconnection	withsunspotsthatthespots
occur	in	these	particular	zones	and	are	rarely	found	outside	them.
fig.	74.—eclipse	of	july	20,	1878.—trouvelot.
fig.	74.—eclipse	of	july	20,	1878.—trouvelot.
fig.	75.—eclipse	of	april	16,	1893.—schaeberle.
fig.	75.—eclipse	of	april	16,	1893.—schaeberle.
123.	invisible	parts	of	the	sun.	the	corona.—thus	far	we	have	been	dealing	with	parts
of	the	sun	that	may	be	seen	and	photographed	under	all	ordinary	conditions.	but	outside	of
and	surroundingthese	partsis	an	envelope,	or	rather	several	envelopes,	of	much	greater
extentthan	the	visible	sun.	these	envelopes	are	forthe	most	partinvisible	save	atthose
times	when	the	brighter	central	portions	of	the	sun	are	hidden	in	a	total	eclipse.
fig.	76.—eclipse	of	january	21,	1898.—campbell.
fig.	76.—eclipse	of	january	21,	1898.—campbell.
fig.	74	is	from	a	drawing,	and	figs.	75	and	76	are	from	eclipse	photographs	showing	this
regionin	whichthe	most	conspicuous	objectisthe	halo	ofsoftlight	calledthe	corona,
that	completely	surrounds	the	sun	but	is	seen	to	be	of	differing	shapes	and	differing	extent
atthe	several	eclipses	here	shown,	although	alarge	part	ofthese	apparent	differencesis
due	to	technical	difficulties	in	photographing,	and	reproducing	an	object	with	outlines	so
vagueasthoseofthecoronatheoutlineofthecoronaissoindefiniteanditsouter
portions	so	faint	that	it	is	impossible	to	assign	to	it	precise	dimensions,	but	at	its	greatest
extent	it	reaches	out	for	several	millions	of	miles	and	fills	a	space	more	than	twenty	times
aslargeasthe	visible	partofthesun.	despiteitshuge	bulkitisof	most	unsubstantial
characteranairynothingthroughwhichcometshavebeenknowntoforcetheirway
around	the	sun	from	one	side	to	the	otherliterally	for	millions	of	miles,	without	having
theircourseinfluencedortheirvelocitycheckedtoanyappreciableextentthis	would
hardly	be	possible	if	the	density	even	at	the	bottom	of	the	corona	were	greater	than	that	of
the	best	vacuum	which	we	are	able	to	produce	in	laboratory	experiments.	it	seems	odd	that
avacuumshouldgiveoffsobrightalightasthecoronalpicturesshowandtheexact
characterofthatlightandthenatureofthecoronaarestillsubjectsofdisputeamong
astronomersalthoughitisgenerallyagreedthatinpartatleastitslightisordinary
sunlight	faintly	reflected	from	the	widely	scattered	molecules	composing	the	substance	of
the	coronaitisalso	probablethatin	partthelight	hasits	origininthe	coronaitself.	a
curious	and	at	present	unconfirmed	result	announced	by	one	of	the	observers	of	the	eclipse
of	may	28,	1900,	is	that	the	corona	is	not	hot,	its	effective	temperature	being	lower	than
that	of	the	instrument	used	for	the	observation.
fig.	77.—solar	prominence	of	march	25,	1895.—hale.	fig.	77.—solar	prominence	of
march	25,	1895.—hale.
fig.	78.—a	solar	prominence.—hale.	fig.	78.—a	solar	prominence.—halethechromosphere.—betweenthecoronaandthephotospherethereisathin
separating	layer	called	the	chromosphere	(greek,	color	sphere),	because	when	seen	at	an
eclipse	it	shines	with	a	brilliant	red	light	quite	unlike	anything	else	upon	the	sun	save	the
prominenceswhicharethemselvesonlypartsofthechromospheretemporarilythrown
above	its	surface,	as	in	a	fountain	a	jet	of	water	is	thrown	up	from	the	basin	and	remains
forafewmomentssuspendedinmid-airnotinfrequentlyinsuchafountainforeign
matterissweptupbytherushofthewater—dirttwigssmallfishetc.—andinlike
manner	the	prominences	often	carry	along	with	them	parts	of	the	underlying	layers	of	the
sun,	photospherefaculæ,	etc.,	whichrevealtheir	presenceinthe	prominence	by	adding
theircharacteristiclinestothespectrumlikethatofthechromospherewhichthe
prominencepresentswhentheyareabsentnoneoftheeclipsephotographs(figs74
toshowthechromospherebecausethecoloreffectislackinginthembutagreat
curving	prominence	may	beseen	nearthebottom	of	figandsmalleronesatother
parts	of	the	sun’s	edge.
125.	prominences.—fig.	77	shows	upon	a	larger	scale	one	of	these	prominences	rising	to
aheightofmilesabovethephotosphereandanotherphotographtaken18
minuteslater,	but	not	reproduced	here,	showed	the	same	prominence	grown	inthis	brief
interval	to	a	stature	of	280,000	miles.	these	pictures	were	not	taken	during	an	eclipse,	but
infullsunlightusingthesamespectroscopicapparatuswhichwasemployedin
connection	withthefacultodiminishthebrightnessofthebackground	without	much
enfeeblingthebrilliancyoftheprominenceitselfthedarkbasefromwhichthe
prominence	seems	to	spring	is	not	the	sun’s	edge,	but	a	part	of	the	apparatus	used	to	cut
off	the	direct	sunlight.
fig.	78	contains	a	series	of	photographs	of	another	prominence	taken	within	an	interval	of
1	hour	47	minutes	and	showing	changesin	size	and	shape	which	are	much	more	nearly
typicaloftheordinaryprominencethanwastheveryunusualchangeinthecaseof
fig.	77.
fig.	79.—contrasted	forms	of	solar	prominences.—zoellner.
fig.	79.—contrasted	forms	of	solar	prominences.—zoellner.
theprecedingpicturesarefromphotographsand	withthemthestudent	maycompare
figwhichisconstructedfromdrawingsmadeatthespectroscopebythegerman
astronomer	zoellner.	the	changes	here	shown	are	most	marked	in	the	prominence	at	the
left,	which	is	shaped	like	a	broken	tree	trunk,	and	which	appears	to	be	vibrating	from	one
side	to	the	other	like	a	reed	shaken	in	the	wind.	such	a	prominence	is	frequently	called	an
eruptive	one,	a	name	suggested	by	its	appearance	of	having	been	blown	out	from	the	sun
bysomethinglikeanexplosionwhiletheprominenceattherightinthisseriesof
drawingswhichappearsmuchlessagitatediscalledbycontrastwiththeothera
quiescent	prominence.	these	quiescent	prominences	are,	as	a	rule,	much	longer-lived	than
the	eruptive	ones.	one	more	picture	of	prominences(figisintroducedtoshowthe
continuous	stretch	of	chromosphere	out	of	which	they	spring.
fig.	80.—prominences	and	chromosphere.—hale.
fig.	80.—prominences	and	chromosphere.—hale.
prominencesareseenonlyattheedgeofthesunbecauseitistherealonethatthe
necessary	background	can	be	obtained,	butthey	must	occur	atthe	center	ofthe	sun	and
elsewhere	quite	as	well	as	atthe	edge,	and	itis	probable	that	quiescent	prominences	are
distributedoverallpartsofthesun’ssurfacebuteruptiveprominencesshowastrong
tendency	toward	the	regions	of	sun	spots	and	faculæ	as	if	all	three	were	intimately	related
phenomena.
126.	thesunasamachine.—thusfarwehaveconsideredtheanatomyofthesun,
dissectingitintoitsseveralpartsandournextstepshouldbeaconsiderationofits
physiologytherelation	ofthe	partstoeach	otherandtheirfunctionincarrying	onthe
work	of	the	solar	organism,	but	this	step,	unfortunately,	must	be	a	lame	one.	the	science
of	astronomy	to-day	possesses	no	comprehensive	and	well-established	theory	of	this	kind,
butlookstothefutureforthesolutionofthisthegreatestpendingproblemofsolar
physics.	progress	has	been	made	toward	its	solution,	and	among	the	steps	of	this	progress
that	we	shall	have	to	consider,	the	first	and	most	important	is	the	conception	of	the	sun	as
a	kind	of	heat	engine.
inasteam	enginecoalisburned	underthe	boileranditschemicalenergytransformed
intoheatistakenupbythewateranddeliveredthroughsteamasamediumtothe
enginewhichagaintransformsandgivesitoutasmechanicalworkintheturningof
shaftsthe	driving	of	machinery,	etc.	nowthe	function	ofthe	sun	is	exactly	oppositeto
that	of	the	engine	and	boiler:	it	gives	out,	instead	of	receiving,	radiant	energy;	but,	like	the
engine,	it	must	be	fed	from	some	source;	it	can	not	be	run	upon	nothing	at	all	any	more
than	the	engine	can	run	day	after	day	without	fresh	supplies	of	fuel	underits	boiler.	we
know	that	for	some	thousands	of	yearsthe	sun	has	been	furnishing	light	and	heattothe
earth	in	practically	unvarying	amount,	and	not	to	the	earth	alone,	but	it	has	been	pouring
forththeseformsofenergyineverydirection,	withoutapparentregardtoeitheruseor
economyofalltheradiantenergygivenoffbythesunonlytwopartsoutofevery
thousand	millionfall	upon	any	planet	ofthe	solarsystem,	and	ofthissmallfractionthe
earthtakesaboutonetenthforthemaintenanceofitsvariedformsoflifeandaction.
astronomers	and	physicists	have	sought	on	every	hand	for	an	explanation	of	the	means	by
whichthistremendousoutputofenergyismaintainedcenturyaftercenturywithout
sensiblediminutionandhavecomewithalmostonemindtotheconclusionthatthe
gravitativeforceswhichresideinthesun’sownmassfurnishtheonlyadequate
explanationforitalthoughthey	maybeinsomesmallmeasurere-enforcedby	minor
influences,	such	as	the	fall	of	meteoric	dust	and	stones	into	the	sun.
every	boy	who	has	inflated	a	bicycle	tire	with	a	hand	pump	knows	that	the	pump	grows
warm	during	the	operation,	on	account	of	the	compression	of	the	air	within	the	cylinder.	a
part	of	the	muscular	force	(energy)	expended	in	working	the	pump	reappears	in	the	heat
which	warms	both	air	and	pump,	and	a	similar	process	is	forever	going	on	in	the	sun,	only
inplaceofmuscularforcewemusttheresubstitutethetremendousattractionof
gravitation,	28	times	as	great	as	upon	the	earth.	“the	matter	in	the	interior	of	the	sun	must
beasashuttlecockbetweenthestupendouspressureandtheenormouslyhigh
temperaturetheonetendingtocompressandtheothertoexpanditbutwiththis
importantdifferencebetweenthemthetemperaturesteadilytendstofallastheheat
energyis	wasted	away,	whilethe	gravitativeforcesuffers	no	corresponding	diminution,
and	in	the	long	run	must	gain	the	upper	hand,	causing	the	sun	to	shrink	and	become	more
denseitisthisprogressiveshrinkingandcompressionofitsmoleculesintoasmaller
space	which	supplies	the	energy	contained	in	the	sun’s	output	of	light	and	heat.	according
to	lord	kelvineach	centimeter	ofshrinkageinthesun’s	diameterfurnishesthe	energy
required	to	keep	up	its	radiation	for	something	more	than	an	hour,	and,	on	account	of	the
sun’sgreatdistancetheshrinkage	mightgoonatthisratefor	manycenturies	without
producing	any	measurable	effect	in	the	sun’s	appearancegaseousconstitutionofthesun.—buthelmholtz’sdynamicaltheoryofthe
maintenanceofthesun’sheatwhichwearehereconsideringincludesoneessential
feature	that	is	not	sufficiently	stated	above.	in	order	that	the	explanation	may	hold	true,	it
is	necessary	that	the	sun	should	be	in	the	main	a	gaseous	body,	composed	from	center	to
circumferenceofgasesinsteadofsolidorliquidpartspumpingair	warmsthebicycle
pump	in	a	way	that	pumping	water	or	oil	will	not.
the	high	temperature	of	the	sun	itself	furnishes	sufficient	reason	for	supposing	the	solar
material	to	be	in	the	gaseous	state,	but	the	gas	composing	those	parts	of	the	sun	below	the
photospheremustbeverydifferentinsomeofitscharacteristicsfromtheairorother
gases	with	which	we	are	familiar	at	the	earth,	since	its	average	density	is	1,000	times	as
great	as	that	of	air,	and	its	consistence	and	mechanical	behavior	must	be	more	like	that	of
honey	or	tar	than	that	of	any	gas	with	which	we	are	familiar.	it	is	worth	noting,	however,
that	if	a	hole	were	dug	into	the	crust	of	the	earth	to	a	depth	of	15	or	20	miles	the	air	at	the
bottom	of	the	hole	would	be	compressed	by	that	above	it	to	a	density	comparable	with	that
of	the	solar	gases.
128.	the	sun’s	circulation.—it	is	plainthat	underthe	conditions	which	existinthe	sun
the	outer	portions,	which	can	radiate	their	heat	freely	into	space,	must	be	cooler	than	the
inner	central	parts,	andthis	difference	oftemperature	must	set	up	currents	of	hot	matter
driftingupwardandoutwardfrom	withinthesunandcountercurrentsofcooler	matter
settlingdowntotakeitsplacesotootheremustbesomelevelatwhichthefree
radiation	into	outer	space	chills	the	hot	matter	sufficiently	to	condense	its	less	refractory
gases	into	clouds	made	up	of	liquid	drops,	just	as	on	a	cloudy	day	there	is	a	level	in	our
own	atmosphere	at	which	the	vapor	of	water	condenses	into	liquid	drops	which	form	the
thinshell	ofcloudsthat	hoversabovethe	earth’ssurface,	whileabove	and	belowisthe
gaseous	atmosphere.	inthe	case	ofthe	sun	this	cloud	layeris	always	present	and	isthat
partwhichwehavelearnedtocallthephotosphereabovethephotosphereliesthe
chromosphere,	composed	of	gasesless	easilyliquefied,	hydrogen	isthe	chief	one,	while
betweenphotosphereandchromosphereisathinlayerofmetallicvaporsperhaps
indistinguishable	from	the	top	crust	of	the	photosphere	itself,	which	by	absorbing	the	light
given	off	from	the	liquid	photosphere	produces	the	greater	part	of	the	fraunhofer	lines	in
the	solar	spectrum.
from	time	to	time	the	hot	matter	struggling	up	from	below	breaks	through	the	photosphere
and,	carrying	withit	a	certain	amount	ofthe	metallic	vaporsislaunchedintothe	upper
andcoolerregionsofthesun,	whereparting	withitsheatitfallsbackagainuponthe
photosphereandisabsorbedintoititisaltogetherprobablethatthecoronaischiefly
composed	of	fine	particles	ejected	from	the	sun	with	velocities	sufficient	to	carry	them	to
aheightof	millionsof	milesorevensufficienttocarrythemoffnevertoreturnthe
matter	of	the	corona	must	certainly	be	in	a	state	of	the	most	lively	agitation,	its	particles
being	alternately	hurled	up	from	the	photosphere	and	falling	back	again	like	fireworks,	the
particles	which	makeupthecoronaofto-daybeingquiteadifferentsetfromthoseof
yesterday	or	last	week.	it	seems	beyond	question	that	the	prominences	and	faculæ	too	are
produced	in	some	way	by	this	up-and-down	circulation	ofthe	sun’s	matter,	and	that	any
mechanical	explanation	of	the	sun	must	be	worked	out	along	these	lines;	but	the	problem
is	an	exceedingly	difficult	one,	and	mustinclude	and	explain	many	other	features	ofthe
sun’s	activity	of	which	only	a	few	can	be	considered	here.
129.	the	sun-spot	period.—sun	spots	come	and	go,	and	at	best	any	particular	spot	is	but
short-livedrarelylastingmorethanamonthortwoandmoreoftenitsdurationisa
matter	of	only	a	few	days.	they	are	not	equally	numerous	at	all	times,	but,	like	swarms	of
locusts,	they	seem	to	come	and	abound	for	a	season	and	then	almost	to	disappear,	as	if	the
forces	which	produced	them	were	of	a	periodic	character	alternately	active	and	quiet.	the
effect	of	this	periodic	activity	since	1870	is	shown	in	fig.	81,	where	the	horizontal	line	is	a
scale	of	times,	and	the	distance	of	the	curve	above	this	line	for	any	year	shows	the	relative
number	of	spots	which	appeared	upon	the	sun	in	that	year.	this	indicates	very	plainly	thatand	1893	wereyearsofgreatsun-spotactivity,	whileand	1889	were
years	in	which	few	spots	appeared.	the	older	records,	covering	a	period	of	two	centuries,
show	the	same	fluctuationsinthefrequency	of	sun	spots	and	from	these	records	curves
(which	may	befoundin	young’s,	the	sun)	have	been	plottedshowing	asuccession	of
waves	extending	back	for	many	years.
fig.	81.—the	curve	of	sun-spot	frequency.
fig.	81.—the	curve	of	sun-spot	frequency.
thesun-spot	periodistheinterval	oftimefromthe	crest	or	hollow	of	one	wavetothe
corresponding	part	of	the	next	one,	and	on	the	average	this	appears	to	be	a	little	more	than
eleven	years,	but	is	subject	to	considerable	variation.	in	accordance	with	this	period	there
is	drawnin	brokenlinesattheright	of	fig.	81	a	predicted	continuation	ofthesun-spot
curveforthefirstdecadeofthetwentiethcenturytheirregularityshownbythethree
preceding	waves	is	such	that	we	must	not	expect	the	actual	course	of	future	sun	spots	to
correspond	very	closely	to	the	prediction	here	made;	but	in	a	general	way	1901	and	1911
will	probably	be	years	of	few	sun	spots,	while	they	will	be	numerous	in	1905,	but	whether
more	or	less	numerous	than	at	preceding	epochs	of	greatest	frequency	can	not	be	foretold
with	any	approach	to	certainty	so	long	as	we	remain	in	our	present	ignorance	of	the	causes
which	make	the	sun-spot	period.
determine	from	fig.	81	as	accurately	as	possiblethelength	ofthe	sun-spot	perioditis
hardtotelltheexactpositionofacrestorhollow	ofthecurve.	woulditdotodrawa
horizontal	line	midway	between	top	and	bottom	of	the	curve	and	determine	the	length	of
the	period	from	its	intersections	with	the	curve—e.	g.,	in	1874	and	1885?
fig.	82.—illustrating	change	of	the	sun-spot	zones.
fig.	82.—illustrating	change	of	the	sun-spot	zones.
130.	thesun-spotzones.—ithasbeenalreadynotedthatsunspotsarefoundonlyin
certain	zones	of	latitude	upon	the	sun,	and	that	faculæ	and	eruptive	prominences	abound	in
these	zones	more	than	elsewhere,	although	not	strictly	confined	to	them.	we	have	now	to
note	a	peculiarity	ofthese	zones	which	oughtto	furnish	a	clew	tothe	sun’s	mechanism,
although	up	to	the	present	time	it	has	not	been	successfully	traced	out.	just	before	a	sun-
spot	minimum	the	few	spots	which	appear	are	forthe	most	part	clustered	nearthe	sun’s
equator.	asthese	spots	die	outtwo	new	groups	appear,	one	norththe	other	south	ofthe
sun’s	equator	and	about	25°	or	30°	distantfrom	it,	and	asthe	period	advancestoward	a
maximumthesegroupsshifttheirpositionsmoreandmoretowardtheequatorthus
approaching	each	other	but	leaving	between	them	a	vacant	lane,	which	becomes	steadily
narrower	until	at	the	close	of	the	period,	when	the	next	minimum	is	at	hand,	it	reaches	its
narrowestdimensionsbutdoesnotaltogethercloseupeventheninfigthese
relationsareshownfortheperiodfallingbetweenandbymeansofthe
horizontal	lines;	for	each	year	one	line	in	the	northern	and	one	in	the	southern	hemisphere
of	the	sun,	their	lengths	being	proportional	to	the	number	of	spots	which	appeared	in	the
corresponding	hemisphere	during	the	year,	and	their	positions	on	the	sun’s	disk	showing
the	average	latitude	of	the	spots	in	question.	it	is	very	apparent	from	the	figure	that	during
this	decade	the	sun’s	southern	hemisphere	was	much	more	active	than	the	northern	one	in
the	production	of	spots,	and	this	appears	to	be	generally	the	case,	although	the	difference
is	not	usually	as	great	as	in	this	particular	decadeinfluenceofthesun-spotperiod.—sunspotsarecertainlylesshotthanthe
surrounding	parts	of	the	sun’s	surface,	and,	in	view	of	the	intimate	dependence	of	the	earth
upon	the	solar	radiation,	it	would	be	in	no	way	surprising	if	their	presence	or	absence	from
the	sun’s	face	should	make	itself	felt	in	some	degree	upon	the	earth,	raising	and	lowering
itstemperatureandquitepossiblyaffectingitinotherwaysingeniousmenhave
suggested	many	such	kinds	of	influence,	which,	according	to	their	investigations,	appear
torunincyclesofelevenyearsabundantandscantyharvestscyclonestornadoes,
epidemics,	rainfall,	etc.,	are	among	these	alleged	effects,	and	it	is	possible	that	there	may
be	a	real	connection	between	any	or	all	of	them	and	the	sun-spot	period,	but	for	the	most
part	astronomers	are	inclined	to	hold	that	there	is	only	one	case	in	which	the	evidence	is
strong	enough	to	really	establish	a	connection	of	this	kind.	the	magnetic	condition	of	the
earth	and	its	disturbances,	which	are	called	magnetic	storms,	do	certainly	follow	in	a	very
marked	manner	the	course	of	sun-spot	activity,	and	perhaps	there	should	be	added	to	this
thestatementthatauroras(northernlightsstandincloserelationtothesemagnetic
disturbances	and	are	most	frequent	at	the	times	of	sun-spot	maxima.
upon	the	sun,	however,	the	influence	of	the	spot	period	is	not	limited	to	things	in	and	near
the	photosphere,	but	extends	to	the	outermost	limits	of	the	corona.	determine	from	fig.	81
the	particular	part	of	the	sun-spot	period	corresponding	to	the	date	of	each	picture	of	the
corona	and	note	how	the	pictures	which	were	taken	near	times	of	sun-spot	minima	present
a	general	agreementinthe	shape	and	extent	ofthe	corona,	whilethe	picturestaken	at	a
timeofmaximumactivityofthesunspotsshowaverydifferentlyshapedandmuch
smaller	corona.
132.	the	law	of	the	sun’s	rotation.—we	have	seen	in	a	previous	part	of	the	chapter	how
the	time	required	by	the	sun	to	make	a	complete	rotation	upon	its	axis	may	be	determined
from	photographs	showing	the	progress	of	a	spot	or	group	of	spots	across	its	disk,	and	we
have	now	to	add	that	when	this	is	done	systematically	by	means	of	many	spots	situated	in
different	solar	latitudes	it	leads	to	a	very	peculiar	and	extraordinary	result.	each	particular
parallel	oflatitude	hasits	own	period	ofrotation	differentfromthat	ofits	neighbors	on
either	side,	so	thatthere	can	be	no	such	thing	as	a	fixed	geography	ofthe	sun’s	surface.
every	partofitisconstantlytaking	upa	new	position	withrespecttoevery	other	part,
much	as	if	the	gulf	of	mexico	should	be	south	of	the	united	states	this	year,	southeast	of
it	next	year,	and	at	the	end	of	a	decade	should	have	shifted	around	to	the	opposite	side	of
theearthfrom	us.	a	meridianoflongitudedrawndownthe	mississippi	valleyremains
always	a	straight	line,	or,	rather,	great	circle,	upon	the	surface	of	the	earth,	while	fig.	83
shows	what	would	become	of	such	a	meridian	drawn	through	the	equatorial	parts	ofthe
sun’s	disk.	in	the	first	diagram	it	appears	as	a	straight	line	running	down	the	middle	of	the
sun’s	disk.	twenty-five	dayslater,	when	the	same	face	ofthe	sun	comes	backinto	view
againafter	makingacompleterevolutionabouttheaxistheequatorialparts	willhave
moved	so	much	faster	and	farther	than	those	in	higher	latitudes	that	the	meridian	will	be
warpedasintheseconddiagramandstillmorewarpedafteranotherandanother
revolution,	as	shown	in	the	figure.
fig.	83.—effect	of	the	sun’s	peculiar	rotation	in	warping	a	meridian,	originally	straight.
fig.	83.—effect	of	the	sun’s	peculiar	rotation	in	warping	a	meridian,	originally
straight.
at	least	such	is	the	case	if	the	spots	truly	represent	the	way	in	which	the	sun	turns	round.
there	is,	however,	a	possibility	that	the	spots	themselves	drift	with	varying	speeds	across
the	face	of	the	sun,	and	that	the	differences	which	we	find	in	their	rates	of	motion	belong
to	them	rather	than	to	the	photosphere.	just	what	happens	in	the	regions	near	the	poles	is
hard	to	say,	for	the	sun	spots	only	extend	about	halfway	from	the	equator	to	the	poles,	and
the	spectroscope,	which	may	be	made	to	furnish	a	certain	amount	of	information	bearing
upon	the	case,	is	not	as	yet	altogether	conclusive,	nor	are	the	faculæ	which	have	also	been
observed	for	this	purpose.
thesimpletheorythatthesolar	phenomena	arecaused	by	aninterchange	of	hotterand
coolermatterbetweenthephotosphereandthelowerstrataofthesunfurnishesinits
present	shape	little	or	no	explanation	of	such	features	as	the	sun-spot	period,	the	variations
in	the	corona,	the	peculiar	character	of	the	sun’s	rotation,	etc.,	and	we	have	still	unsolved
inthe	mechanicaltheory	ofthesun	one	ofthe	noblestproblems	ofastronomyand	one
upon	whichbothobserversandtheoreticalastronomersareassiduouslyworkingatthe
presenttimeaclosewatchiskeptuponsunspotsandprominencesthecoronais
observed	at	every	total	eclipse,	and	numerous	are	the	ingenious	methods	which	are	being
suggestedandtriedforobservingitwithoutaneclipseinordinarydaylightattempts,
more	or	less	plausible,	have	been	made	and	are	now	pending	to	explain	photosphere,	spots
and	the	reversing	layer	by	means	of	the	refraction	of	light	within	the	sun’s	outer	envelope
ofgasesanditseemsaltogetherprobableinviewofthesecombinedactivitiesthata
considerable	additionto	ourstore	of	knowledge	concerningthesun	may	be	expectedin
the	not	distant	future.

chapter	xi
the	planets
133.	planets.—circling	about	the	sun,	under	the	influence	of	his	attraction,	is	a	family	of
planets	each	member	of	which	is,	like	the	moon,	a	dark	body	shining	by	reflected	sunlight,
andthereforepresentingphasesalthoughonlytwoofthemmercuryandvenusrun
throughthecompleteseries—newfirstquarterfulllastquarter—whichthemoon
presents.	the	way	in	which	their	orbits	are	grouped	about	the	sun	has	been	considered	in
chapter	iii,	and	figs.	16	and	17	of	that	chapter	may	be	completed	so	as	to	represent	all	of
theplanetsbydrawinginfigtwocircleswithradiiofandcentimeters
respectivelytorepresentthe	orbits	ofthe	planets	uranusand	neptune,	which	are	more
remotefromthesunthansaturnandbyintroducingalittleinsidetheorbitofjupiter
about	500	ellipses	of	different	sizes,	shapes,	and	positions	to	represent	a	group	of	minor
planets	or	asteroids	asthey	are	often	calleditis	convenientto	regardthese	asteroids	as
composingbythemselvesaclassofverysmallplanetswhiletheremaininglarger
planetsfallnaturallyintotwootherclassesagroupofmedium-sizedones—mercury,
venus,	earth,	and	mars—called	inner	planets	by	reason	of	their	nearness	to	the	sun;	and
the	outerplanets—jupitersaturn,	uranus,	neptune—each	of	whichis	muchlargerand
more	massive	than	any	planet	of	the	inner	group.	compare	in	figs.	84	and	85	their	relative
sizes.	the	earth,	e,	is	introduced	into	fig.	85	as	a	connecting	link	between	the	two	figures.
someoftheseplanetsliketheearthareattendedbyoneormoremoonstechnically
calledsatelliteswhichalsoshinebyreflectedsunlightandwhichmoveabouttheir
respectiveplanetsinaccordance	withthelawofgravitation,	muchasthe	moon	moves
around	the	earth.
fig.	84.—the	inner	planets	and	the	moon.
fig.	84.—the	inner	planets	and	the	moon.
fig.	85.—the	outer	planets.
fig.	85.—the	outer	planets.
134.	distancesoftheplanetsfromthesun.—itisacomparativelysimplematterto
observe	these	planets	year	after	year	as	they	move	among	the	stars,	and	to	find	from	these
observations	how	long	each	one	of	them	requires	to	make	its	circuit	around	the	sun—that
isitsperiodictime,	twhichfiguresinkepler’sthirdlawandwhentheseperiodic
timeshavebeenascertainedtousetheminconnection	withthatlawtodeterminethe
meandistanceofeachplanetfromthesunthusjupiterrequiresdaysto	move
completely	around	its	orbit;	and	comparing	this	with	the	periodic	time	and	mean	distance
of	the	earth	we	find—
a3	/	(4333)2	=	(93,000,000)3	/	(365.25)2,
which	when	solved	gives	as	the	mean	distance	of	jupiter	from	the	sun,	483,730,000	miles,
or	5.20	times	as	distant	as	the	earth.	if	we	make	a	similar	computation	for	each	planet,	we
shall	find	that	their	distances	from	the	sun	show	a	remarkable	agreement	with	an	artificial
series	of	numbers	called	bode’s	law.	we	write	down	the	numbers	contained	in	the	first	line
of	figures	below,	each	of	which,	afterthe	secondis	obtained	by	doublingthe	preceding
one,	addto	each	number	and	point	off	one	place	of	decimalstheresulting	numberis
(approximately)	the	distance	of	the	corresponding	planet	from	the	sun30.1
mercury.venus.earth.marsjupitersaturn.uranus.neptune4
the	last	line	of	figures	shows	the	real	distance	of	the	planet	as	determined	from	kepler’s
law,	the	earth’s	mean	distance	from	the	sun	being	taken	as	the	unit	for	this	purpose.	with
exception	of	neptunethe	agreement	between	bode’slaw	andthetrue	distancesis	very
striking,	but	most	remarkable	is	the	presence	in	the	series	of	a	number,	2.8,	with	no	planet
corresponding	to	it.	this	led	astronomers	atthe	time	bode	published	the	law,	something
more	than	a	century	agoto	give	new	heed	to	a	suggestion	made	long	before	by	kepler,
that	there	might	be	an	unknown	planet	moving	between	the	orbits	of	mars	and	jupiter,	and
a	number	of	them	agreed	to	search	for	such	a	planet,	each	in	a	part	of	the	sky	assigned	him
forthatpurposebuttheywereanticipatedbypiazzianitalianwhofoundthenew
planet,	by	accident,	on	the	first	day	of	the	nineteenth	century,	moving	at	a	distance	from
the	sun	represented	by	the	number	2.77.
this	planet	was	the	first	of	the	asteroids,	and	in	the	century	that	has	elapsed	hundreds	of
them	have	been	discovered,	while	atthe	presenttime	no	year	passes	by	withoutseveral
more	being	added	to	the	number.	while	some	of	these	are	nearer	to	the	sun	than	is	the	first
one	discovered,	and	others	are	farther	from	it,	their	average	distance	is	fairly	represented
by	the	number	2.8.
why	bode’slawshouldholdtrueorevensonearlytrueasitdoesisanunexplained
riddleandmanyastronomersareinclinedtocallitnolawatallbutonlyachance
coincidence—an	illustration	of	the	“inherent	capacity	of	figures	to	be	juggled	with”;	but	if
so,	it	is	passing	strange	that	it	should	represent	the	distance	of	the	asteroids	and	of	uranus,
which	was	also	an	undiscovered	planet	at	the	time	the	law	was	publishedtheplanetscomparedwitheachother.—whenwepassfromgeneral
considerationstoastudyoftheindividualpeculiaritiesoftheplanetswefindgreat
differences	in	the	extent	of	knowledge	concerning	them,	and	the	reason	for	this	is	not	far
to	seek.	neptune	and	uranus,	atthe	outskirts	ofthe	solar	system,	are	so	remote	from	us
and	so	feebly	illumined	by	the	sun	that	any	detailed	study	of	them	can	go	but	little	beyond
determiningthe	numbers	which	representtheir	size,	mass,	densitythe	character	oftheir
orbits,	etc.	the	asteroids	are	so	smallthatinthetelescope	they	look	like	mere	points	of
light,	absolutely	indistinguishable	in	appearance	from	the	fainter	stars.	mercury,	although
closer	at	hand	and	presenting	a	disk	of	considerable	size,	always	stands	so	nearthe	sun
thatitsobservationisdifficultonthisaccountsomethingofthesamekindistruefor
venus,	althoughin	muchless	degree;	while	marsjupiter,	and	saturn	are	comparatively
easy	objects	for	telescopic	study,	and	our	knowledge	of	them,	while	far	from	complete,	is
considerably	greater	than	for	the	other	planets.
figsandshowtherelativesizesoftheplanetscomposingtheinnerandouter
groupsrespectivelyandfurnishthenumericaldataconcerningtheirdiameters,	masses,
densities,	etc.,	which	are	of	most	importance	in	judging	of	their	physical	condition.	each
planet,	save	saturn,	is	represented	by	two	circles,	of	which	the	outer	is	drawn	proportional
tothesizeoftheplanetandtheinnershowstheamountofmaterialthatmustbe
subtracted	from	the	interior	in	order	that	the	remaining	shell	shall	just	float	in	water.	note
the	great	difference	in	thickness	of	shell	between	the	two	groups.	saturn,	having	a	mean
density	less	than	that	of	water,	must	have	something	loaded	upon	it,	instead	of	removed,	in
order	that	it	should	float	just	submerged.
jupiter
136.	appearance.—commencing	our	consideration	of	the	individual	planets	with	jupiter,
whichisbyfarthelargestofthemexceedingbothinbulkandmassalltheothers
combined,	we	have	in	fig.	86	four	representations	of	jupiter	and	his	family	of	satellites	as
they	may	be	seen	in	a	very	small	telescope—e.	g.,	an	opera	glass—save	that	the	little	dots
whichhererepresentthesatellitesarenumberedinordertopreservetheir
identity	in	the	successive	pictures.
thechiefinterestofthesepicturesliesinthesatellitesbutreservingthemforfuture
consideration,	we	note	that	the	planet	itself	resembles	in	shape	the	full	moon,	although	in
respect	of	brightness	it	sends	to	us	less	than	1/6000	part	as	much	light	as	the	moon.	from	a
consideration	of	the	motion	of	jupiter	and	the	earth	in	fig.	16,	show	that	jupiter	can	not
present	any	such	phases	as	does	the	moon,	but	that	its	disk	must	be	at	all	times	nearly	full.
as	seen	from	saturn,	what	kind	of	phases	would	jupiter	present?
137.	the	belts.—even	upon	the	small	scale	of	fig.	86	we	detectthe	most	characteristic
feature	of	jupiter’s	appearanceinthetelescopethetwo	bands	extending	across	hisface
paralleltothelineofthesatellitesandinfigthesesamedarkbandsmaybe
recognized	amid	the	abundance	of	detail	whichis	here	brought	out	by	alargetelescope.
photography	does	not	succeed	as	a	means	of	reproducing	this	detail,	and	for	it	we	have	to
rely	upon	the	skill	of	the	artist	astronomer.	the	lettering	shows	the	pacific	standard	time
at	which	the	sketches	were	made,	and	also	the	longitude	of	the	meridian	of	jupiter	passing
down	the	center	of	the	planet’s	disk.
fig.	86.—jupiter	and	his	satellites.
fig.	86.—jupiter	and	his	satellites.
fig.	87.—drawings	of	jupiter	made	at	the	36-inch	telescope	of	the	lick	observatory.—
keeler.
fig.	87.—drawings	of	jupiter	made	at	the	36-inch	telescope	of	the	lick	observatory.
—keeler.
the	dark	bands	are	called	technically	the	belts	of	jupiter;	and	a	comparison	of	these	belts
in	the	second	and	third	pictures	of	the	group,	in	which	nearly	the	same	face	of	the	planet	is
turnedtowarduswillshowthattheyaresubjecttoconsiderablechangesofformand
position	even	within	the	space	of	a	few	days.	so,	too,	by	a	comparison	of	such	markings
as	the	round	white	spots	in	the	upper	parts	of	the	disks,	and	the	indentations	in	the	edges
ofthebelts,	we	mayrecognizethattheplanetisintheactofturningroundand	must
therefore	have	an	axis	about	which	it	turns,	and	poles,	an	equator,	etc.	the	belts	are	in	fact
paralleltotheplanet’sequatorandgeneralizingfrom	whatappearsinthepictures,	we
maysaythatthereisalwaysastrongly	marked	beltoneachsideoftheequator	witha
lightercoloredstreakbetweenthemandthatfartherfromtheequatorareotherbelts
variable	in	number,	less	conspicuous,	and	less	permanent	than	the	two	first	seen.	compare
the	position	of	the	principal	belts	with	the	position	of	the	zones	of	sun-spot	activity	in	the
sun.	a	feature	of	the	planet’s	surface,	which	can	not	be	here	reproduced,	is	the	rich	color
effecttobefounduponittheprincipalbeltsareabrick-redorsalmoncolorthe
intervening	spaces	in	general	white	but	richly	mottled,	and	streaked	with	purples,	browns,
and	greens.
the	drawings	show	the	planet	as	it	appeared	in	the	telescope,	inverted,	and	they	must	be
turned	upside	down	if	we	wishthe	points	ofthe	compassto	appear	as	upon	aterrestrial
mapbearingthisinmindnoteinthelastpicturethegreatovalspotinthesouthern
hemisphere	ofjupiter.	thisisafamous	marking,	knownfromitscolorasthe	great	red
spot,	which	appeared	first	in	1878	and	has	persisted	to	the	present	day	(1900),	sometimes
the	most	conspicuous	marking	onthe	planet,	at	others	reducedto	a	mere	ghost	ofitself,
almostinvisible	save	fortheindentation	which	it	makesinthe	southern	edge	ofthe	belt
near	it.
138.	rotation	and	flattening	at	the	poles.—one	further	significant	fact	with	respectto
jupitermaybeobtainedfromacarefulmeasurementofthedrawingstheplanetis
flattened	at	the	poles,	so	that	its	polar	diameter	is	about	one	sixteenth	part	shorter	than	the
equatorial	diameter.	the	flattening	of	the	earth	amounts	to	only	one	three-hundredth	part,
and	the	marked	difference	between	these	two	numbers	finds	its	explanation	in	the	greater
swiftness	of	jupiter’srotation	aboutits	axissincein	both	casesitisthisrotation	which
makes	the	flattening.
itisnoteasytodeterminetheprecisedimensionsoftheplanetsincethisinvolvesa
knowledge	both	of	its	distance	from	us	and	of	the	angle	subtended	by	its	diameter,	but	the
most	recent	determinations	of	this	kind	assign	as	the	equatorial	diameter	90,200	miles,	and
forthe	polar	diameter	84,400	miles.	determine	from	either	ofthese	numbersthe	size	of
the	great	red	spot.
the	earth	turns	on	its	axis	once	in	24	hours	but	no	such	definite	time	can	be	assigned	to
jupiter,	which,	like	the	sun,	seems	to	have	different	rotation	periods	in	different	latitudes
—9h.	50m.	in	the	equatorial	belt	and	9h.	56m.	in	the	dark	belts	and	higher	latitudes.	there
is	some	indication	that	the	larger	part	of	the	visible	surface	rotates	in	9h.	55.6m.,	while	a
broad	stream	along	the	equator	flows	eastward	some	270	miles	per	hour,	and	thus	comes
back	to	the	center	of	the	planet,	as	seen	from	the	earth,	five	or	six	minutes	earlier	than	the
parts	which	do	not	share	in	this	motion.	judged	by	terrestrial	standards,	270	miles	per	hour
isagreatvelocitybutjupiterisconstructedonacolossalscaleandtoowehaveto
compare	this	movement,	not	to	a	current	flowing	in	the	ocean,	but	to	a	wind	blowing	in
the	upper	regions	of	the	earth’s	atmosphere.	the	visible	surface	of	jupiter	is	only	the	top
of	a	cloud	formation,	and	contains	nothing	solid	or	permanent,	if	indeed	there	is	anything
solid	even	at	the	core	of	the	planet.	the	great	red	spot	during	the	first	dozen	years	of	its
existenceinstead	ofremainingfixedrelativetothesurroundingformations,	driftedtwo
thirds	of	the	way	around	the	planet,	and	having	come	to	a	standstill	about	1891,	it	is	now
slowly	retracing	its	path.
139.	physical	condition.—for	a	better	understanding	of	the	physical	condition	of	jupiter,
we	have	now	to	consider	some	independent	lines	of	evidence	which	agree	in	pointing	to
the	conclusion	that	jupiter,	although	classed	withthe	earth	as	a	planetisinits	essential
character	much	more	like	the	sun.
appearance.—the	formations	which	we	see	in	fig.	87	look	like	clouds.	they	gather	and
disappearandtheonlyelementofpermanenceaboutthemistheirtendencytogroup
themselves	along	zones	oflatitude.	if	we	measurethelight	reflected	from	the	planet	we
find	that	its	albedo	is	very	high,	like	that	of	snow	or	our	own	cumulus	clouds,	and	it	is	of
coursegreaterfromthelightpartsofthediskthanfromthedarkerbandsthe
spectroscope	shows	that	the	sunlight	reflected	from	these	darker	belts	is	like	that	reflected
fromthelighterpartssavethatalargerportionoftheblueandvioletrayshasbeen
absorbed	out	of	it,	thus	producing	the	ruddy	tint	of	the	belts,	as	sunset	colors	are	produced
ontheearthandshowingthatherethelighthaspenetratedfartherintotheplanet’s
atmosphere	before	being	thrown	back	by	reflection	from	lower-lying	cloud	surfaces.	the
darkbandsarethereforetoberegardedasriftsinthecloudsreachingdowntosome
considerabledistanceandindicatinganatmosphereofgreatdepththegreatredspot,
28,000	miles	long,	and	obviously	thrusting	back	the	white	clouds	on	every	side	of	it,	year
afteryearcanhardlybeamerepatchonthefaceoftheplanetbutindicatessome
considerable	depth	of	atmosphere.
density.—so,	too,	the	small	mean	density	of	the	planet,	only	1.3	times	that	of	water	and
actually	less	than	the	density	of	the	sun,	suggests	that	the	larger	part	of	the	planet’s	bulk
may	be	made	of	gases	and	clouds,	with	very	little	solid	matter	even	at	the	center;	but	here
we	get	into	a	difficulty	from	which	there	seems	but	one	escape.	the	force	of	gravity	at	the
visible	surface	of	jupiter	may	be	found	from	its	mass	and	dimensions	to	be	2.6	times	as
great	as	atthe	surface	ofthe	earth,	and	the	pressure	exerted	upon	its	atmosphere	by	this
force	oughtto	compressthelower	stratainto	something	more	densethan	we	findinthe
planetsomeideaofthiscompressionmaybeobtainedfromfigwheretheline
marked	e	shows	approximately	how	the	density	of	the	air	increases	as	we	move	from	its
upperstratadowntowardthesurfaceoftheearththroughadistanceofmilesthe
density	at	any	level	being	proportional	to	the	distance	of	the	curved	line	from	the	straight
one	near	it.	the	line	marked	j	in	the	same	figure	shows	how	the	density	would	increase	if
the	force	of	gravity	were	as	great	here	as	it	is	in	jupiter,	and	indicates	a	much	greater	rate
ofincreasestartingfromtheuppersurfaceofthecloudinjupiter’satmosphereif	we
descendnotmilesbutorwhatmustthedensityoftheatmosphere
become	and	how	isthisto	be	reconciled	with	what	we	know	to	bethe	very	small	mean
density	of	the	planet?
we	are	here	in	a	dilemma	between	density	on	the	one	hand	and	the	effects	of	gravity	on
the	other,	and	the	only	escape	from	it	lies	in	the	assumption	that	the	interior	of	jupiter	is
tremendouslyhotandthatthisheatexpandsthesubstanceoftheplanetinspiteofthe
pressure	to	which	it	is	subject,	making	a	large	planet	with	a	low	density,	possibly	gaseous
at	the	very	center,	but	in	its	outer	part	surrounded	by	a	shell	of	clouds	condensed	from	the
gases	by	radiating	their	heat	into	the	cold	of	outer	space.
fig.	88.—increase	of	density	in	the	atmospheres	of	jupiter	and	the	earth.	fig.	88.—
increase	of	density	in	the	atmospheres	of	jupiter	and	the	earth.
this	is	essentially	the	same	physical	condition	that	we	found	for	the	sun,	and	we	may	add,
as	further	points	of	resemblance	between	it	and	jupiter,	that	there	seems	to	be	a	circulation
of	matter	from	the	hot	interior	of	the	planet	to	its	cooler	surface	that	is	more	pronounced	in
thesouthern	hemispherethaninthe	northernandthathasitsperiods	of	maximum	and
minimum	activity,	which,	curiously	enough,	seem	to	coincide	with	periods	of	maximum
and	minimum	sun-spot	development.	of	this,	however,	we	can	not	be	entirely	sure,	since
itisonlyinrecentyearsthatithasbeenstudiedwithsufficientcareandfurther
observationsarerequiredtoshowwhethertheagreementissomethingmorethanan
accidental	and	short-lived	coincidence.
temperature.—the	temperature	of	jupiter	must,	of	course,	be	much	lower	than	that	of	the
sun,	since	the	surface	which	we	see	is	not	luminous	like	the	sun’s;	but	below	the	clouds	it
isnotimprobablethatjupiter	maybeincandescentwhitehotanditissurmised	with
some	show	of	probability	that	a	little	of	its	light	escapes	through	the	clouds	from	time	to
time,	and	helps	to	produce	the	striking	brilliancy	with	which	this	planet	shines.
140.	the	satellites	of	jupiter.—the	satellites	bear	much	the	same	relation	to	jupiter	that
the	moonbearstotheearthrevolvingabouttheplanetinaccordancewiththelawof
gravitation,	and	conforming	to	kepler’s	three	laws,	as	do	the	planets	in	their	courses	about
the	sun.	observe	in	fig.	86	the	position	of	satellite	no.	1	on	the	four	dates,	and	note	how	it
oscillatesbackandforthfromlefttorightofjupiterapparentlymakingacomplete
revolutioninabouttwodays,	while	no.	4	movessteadilyfromlefttorightduringthe
entire	period,	and	has	evidently	made	only	a	fraction	of	a	revolution	in	the	time	covered
by	the	pictures.	this	quicker	motion,	of	course,	means	that	no.	1	is	nearer	to	jupiter	than
no.	4,	and	the	numbers	given	to	the	satellites	show	the	order	of	their	distances	from	the
planet.	the	peculiar	way	in	which	the	satellites	are	grouped,	always	standing	nearly	in	a
straight	line,	shows	that	their	orbits	must	lie	nearly	in	the	same	plane,	and	that	this	plane,
which	is	also	the	plane	of	the	planets’	equator,	is	turned	edgewise	toward	the	earth.
thesesatellitesenjoythedistinctionofbeingthefirstobjectseverdiscovered	withthe
telescopehavingbeenfoundbygalileoalmostimmediatelyafteritsinventiona.	d.
1610.	it	is	quite	possible	that	before	this	time	they	may	have	been	seen	with	the	naked	eye,
forinmorerecentyearsreportsarecurrentthattheyhavebeenseenunderfavorable
circumstancesbysharp-eyedpersonsandverylittletelescopicaidisrequiredtoshow
themlookforthemwithanoperaorfieldglasstheybearthenamesioeuropa,
ganymedecallistowhichhoweverarerarelyusedandfollowingthecustomof
astronomers,	we	shall	designate	them	by	the	roman	numerals	i,	ii,	iii,	iv.
fig.	89.—orbits	of	jupiter’s	satellites.
fig.	89.—orbits	of	jupiter’s	satellites.
fornearlythreecenturiestoastronomersspokeofthefoursatellitesof
jupiterbutinseptemberafifthonewasaddedtothenumberbyprofessor
barnard,	who,	observing	with	the	largest	telescope	then	extant,	found	very	close	to	jupiter
atinyobjectonlypartasbrightastheothersatellitesbutlikethemrevolving
around	jupitera	permanent	member	of	hissystem.	thisiscalledthefifthsatelliteand
fig.	89	shows	the	orbits	of	these	satellites	around	jupiter,	which	is	here	represented	on	the
same	scale	as	the	orbits	themselves.	the	broken	line	just	inside	the	orbit	of	i	represents	the
size	of	the	moon’s	orbit.	the	cut	shows	also	the	periodic	times	of	the	satellites	expressed
indaysandfurnishesinthisrespectastrikingillustrationofthegreat	massofjupiter.
satelliteiisalittlefartherfromjupiterthanisthe	moonfromtheearthbutunderthe
influence	ofa	greaterattractionit	makesthecircuitofitsorbitin	1.77	daysinstead	of
taking	29.53	days,	as	does	the	moon.	determine	from	the	figure	by	the	method	employed
in	§	111	how	much	more	massive	is	jupiter	than	the	earth.
smallasthesesatellitesseemin	figtheyarereallybodiesofconsiderablesizeas
appearsfrom	fig.	90,	wheretheirdimensionsarecompared	withthose	oftheearthand
moonsavethatthefifthsatelliteisnotincludedthisoneissosmallastoescapeall
attempts	at	measuringits	diameter,	butjudgingfromthe	amount	oflightitreflectsthe
periodprintedwiththelegendofthefigurerepresentsagrossexaggerationofthis
satellite’s	size.
fig.	90.—jupiter’s	satellites	compared	with	the	earth	and	moon.
fig.	90.—jupiter’s	satellites	compared	with	the	earth	and	moon.
like	the	moon,	each	of	these	satellites	may	fairly	be	considered	a	world	in	itself,	and	as
suchafittingobjectofdetailedstudybutunfortunatelytheirgreatdistancefromus
makesitimpossibleevenwiththemostpowerfultelescopetoseemoreupontheir
surfaces	than	occasional	vague	markings,	which	hardly	suffice	to	show	the	rotations	of	the
satellites	upon	their	axes.
one	striking	feature,	however,	comes	out	from	a	study	of	their	influence	in	disturbing	each
other’s	motion	about	jupiter.	their	masses	and	the	resulting	densities	of	the	satellites	are
smaller	than	we	should	have	expected	to	find,	the	density	being	less	than	that	of	the	moon,
and	averaging	only	a	little	greater	than	the	density	of	jupiter	itself.	at	the	surface	of	the
third	satellite	the	force	of	gravity	is	but	little	less	than	on	the	moon,	although	the	moon’s
densityisnearlytwiceasgreatasthatofiiiandtherecanbenoquestionhereof
accounting	for	the	low	density	through	expansion	by	great	heat,	as	in	the	case	of	the	sun
and	jupiter.	it	has	been	surmised	that	these	satellites	are	not	solid	bodies,	like	the	earth	and
moon,	but	only	shoals	of	rock	and	stone,	loosely	piled	together	and	kept	from	packing	into
a	solid	mass	by	the	action	of	jupiter	in	raising	tides	within	them.	but	the	explanation	can
hardly	be	regarded	as	an	accepted	article	of	astronomical	belief,	although	itis	supported
by	some	observations	which	tend	to	show	that	the	apparent	shapes	of	the	satellites	change
under	the	influence	of	the	tidal	forces	impressed	upon	them.
141.	eclipses	of	the	satellites.—it	may	be	seen	from	fig.	89	that	in	their	motion	around
theplanetjupiter’ssatellitesmustfromtimetotimepassthroughhisshadowandbe
eclipsedandthattheshadowsofthesatelliteswilloccasionallyfallupontheplanet,
producing	to	an	observer	upon	jupiter	an	eclipse	of	the	sun,	but	to	an	observer	on	the	earth
presenting	only	the	appearance	of	a	round	black	spot	moving	slowly	across	the	face	of	the
planet.	occasionally	also	asatellite	will	pass	exactly	betweenthe	earth	andjupiterand
maybeseenprojectedagainsttheplanetasabackground.	allofthesephenomenaare
duly	predicted	and	observed	by	astronomers,	butthe	eclipses	arethe	only	ones	we	need
considerheretheimportanceoftheseeclipses	wasearlyrecognizedandastronomers
endeavoredtoconstructatheoryoftheirrecurrencewhichwouldpermitaccurate
predictions	of	them	to	be	made.	but	in	this	they	met	with	no	great	success,	for	while	it	was
easy	enough	to	foretell	on	what	night	an	eclipse	of	a	given	satellite	would	occur,	and	even
to	assign	the	hour	of	the	night,	it	was	not	possible	to	make	the	predicted	minute	agree	with
theactualtimeofeclipseuntilafterroemeradanishastronomeroftheseventeenth
century,	found	where	lay	the	trouble.	his	discovery	was,	that	whenever	the	earth	was	on
the	side	of	its	orbit	toward	jupiter	the	eclipses	really	occurred	before	the	predicted	time,
and	when	the	earth	was	on	the	far	side	of	its	orbit	they	came	a	few	minutes	later	than	the
predictedtime.	he	correctlyinferredthatthis	wasto	be	explained,	not	by	anyinfluence
which	the	earth	exerted	upon	jupiter	and	his	satellites,	but	through	the	fact	that	the	light	by
whichweseethesatelliteanditseclipserequiresanappreciabletimetocrossthe
intervening	space,	and	a	longer	time	when	the	earth	is	far	from	jupiter	than	when	it	is	near.
for	half	a	century	roemer’s	viewsfoundlittle	credence,	but	we	know	nowthat	he	was
right,	and	that	on	the	average	the	eclipses	come	8m.	18s.	early	when	the	earth	is	nearest	to
jupiter,	and	8m.	18s.	late	when	it	is	on	the	opposite	side	of	its	orbit.	this	is	equivalent	to
saying	that	light	takes	8m.	18s.	to	cover	the	distance	from	the	sun	to	the	earth,	so	that	at
any	moment	we	see	the	sun	not	asitthen	is,	but	asit	was	8	minutes	earlier.	it	has	been
found	possibleinrecentyearsto	measure	by	directexperimentthe	velocity	with	which
lighttravels—186,337	milespersecond—and	multiplyingthisnumberbythe498s(=
8m.	18s.)	we	obtain	a	new	determination	of	the	sun’s	distance	from	the	earth.	the	product
of	the	two	numbers	is	92,795,826,	in	very	fair	agreement	with	the	93,000,000	miles	found
in	chapter	x;	but,	as	noted	there,	this	method,	like	every	other,	has	its	weak	side,	and	the
result	may	be	a	good	many	thousands	of	miles	in	error.
itis	worthy	of	noteinthis	connectionthat	both	methods	of	obtainingthe	sun’s	distance
whichweregiveninchapter	xinvolvekepler’sthirdlawwhiletheresultobtained
fromjupiter’ssatellitesisentirelyindependentofthislawandtheagreementofthe
several	resultsistherefore	good	evidence	both	forthe	truth	of	kepler’slaws	and	forthe
soundness	of	roemer’s	explanation	of	the	eclipses.	this	mode	of	proof,	by	comparing	the
numericalresultsfurnishedbytwoor	moredifferentprinciplesandshowingthatthey
agree	or	disagree,	is	of	wide	application	and	great	importance	in	physical	science.
saturn
fig.	91.—aspects	of	saturn’s	rings.	fig.	91.—aspects	of	saturn’s	rings.
142.	the	ring	of	saturn.—in	respect	of	size	and	mass	saturn	stands	next	to	jupiter,	and
althoughfarinferiortohimintheserespectsitcontainsmorematerialthanallthe
remaining	planets	combined.	but	the	unique	feature	of	saturn	which	distinguishes	it	from
everyotherknownbodyintheheavensisitsringwhichwaslongapuzzletothe
astronomers	whofirststudiedtheplanet	withatelescope(oneofthemcalledsaturna
planet	with	ears),	but,	was	after	nearly	half	a	century	correctly	understood	and	described
by	huyghens,	whose	latintext	we	translateinto—“itis	surrounded	by	a	ringthinflat,
nowhere	touching	it,	and	making	quite	an	angle	with	the	ecliptic.”
compare	with	this	description	fig.	91,	which	shows	some	of	the	appearances	presented	by
thering	at	different	positions	of	saturninits	orbitit	wastheir	varying	aspectsthatled
huyghens	to	insert	the	last	words	of	his	description,	for,	if	the	plane	of	the	ring	coincided
withtheplaneoftheearth’sorbitthenatalltimesthering	mustbeturnededgewise
toward	the	earth,	as	shown	in	the	middle	picture	of	the	group.	fig.	92	shows	the	sun	and
the	orbit	of	the	earth	placed	near	the	center	of	saturn’s	orbit,	across	whose	circumference
are	ruled	some	oblique	lines	representing	the	plane	of	the	ring,	the	right	end	always	tilted
up,	no	matter	where	the	planet	is	in	its	orbit.	it	is	evident	that	an	observer	upon	the	earth
will	see	the	n	side	of	the	ring	when	the	planet	is	at	n	and	the	s	side	when	it	is	at	s,	as	is
shown	in	the	first	and	third	pictures	of	fig.	91,	while	midway	between	these	positions	the
edge	of	the	ring	will	be	presented	to	the	earth.
fig.	92.—aspects	of	the	ring	in	their	relation	to	saturn’s	orbital	motion.
fig.	92.—aspects	of	the	ring	in	their	relation	to	saturn’s	orbital	motion.
thelast	occasion	ofthis	kind	wasin	october,	1891,	and	withthelargetelescope	ofthe
washburnobservatorythewriteratthattimesawsaturnwithoutatraceofaring
surrounding	it.	the	ring	is	so	thin	that	it	disappears	altogether	when	turned	edgewise.	the
names	of	the	zodiacal	constellations	are	inserted	in	fig.	92	in	their	proper	direction	from
the	sun,	and	from	these	welearnthatthering	will	disappear,	or	be	exceedingly	narrow,
whenever	saturn	is	in	the	constellation	pisces	or	near	the	boundary	line	between	leo	and
virgoitwillbebroadandshowitsnorthernsidewhensaturnisinscorpiusor
sagittariusanditssouthernfacewhentheplanetisingeminiwhatwillbeits
appearance	in	1907	at	the	date	marked	in	the	figure?
143.	nature	of	the	ring.—it	is	apparent	from	figs.	91	and	93	that	saturn’s	ring	is	really
made	up	of	two	or	more	rings	lying	one	inside	of	the	other	and	completely	separated	by	a
dark	space	whichthough	narrowis	as	clean	and	sharp	asif	cut	with	a	knife.	alsothe
inner	edge	of	the	ring	fades	off	into	an	obscure	border	called	the	dusky	ring	or	crape	ring.
this	requires	a	pretty	good	telescope	to	show	it,	as	may	be	inferred	from	the	factthatit
escapednoticeformorethantwocenturiesduringwhichtheplanetwasassiduously
studiedwithtelescopesandwasdiscoveredattheharvardcollegeobservatoryas
recently	as	1850.
although	the	rings	appear	oval	in	all	of	the	pictures,	this	is	mainly	an	effect	of	perspective,
and	they	are	in	fact	nearly	circular	with	the	planet	at	their	center.	the	extreme	diameter	of
theringismilesandfromthisnumberbymethodsalreadyexplained
(chapter	ix),	the	student	should	obtain	the	width	of	the	rings,	their	distance	from	the	ball
oftheplanetandthediameteroftheballastothicknessitisevidentfromthe
disappearance	of	the	ring	when	its	edge	is	turned	toward	the	earththat	itis	very	thin	in
comparison	with	its	diameter,	probably	not	more	than	100	miles	thick,	although	no	exact
measurement	of	this	can	be	made.
fig.	93.—saturn.
fig.	93.—saturn.
from	theoretical	reasons	based	upon	the	law	of	gravitation	astronomers	have	held	that	the
rings	of	saturn	could	not	possibly	be	solid	orliquid	bodies.	the	strainsimpressed	upon
them	by	the	planet’s	attraction	would	tear	into	fragments	steel	rings	made	after	their	size
andshapequiterecentlyprofessorkeelerhasshownbyapplyingthespectroscope
(doppler’s	principle)	to	determine	the	velocity	of	the	ring’s	rotation	about	saturn,	that	the
innerpartsofthering	moveas	kepler’s	third	lawrequires,	morerapidlythan	dothe
outer	parts,	thus	furnishing	a	direct	proof	that	they	are	not	solid,	and	leaving	no	doubt	that
they	are	made	up	of	separate	fragments,	each	moving	about	the	planet	in	its	own	orbit,	like
an	independent	satellite,	but	standing	so	close	to	its	neighbors	that	the	whole	space	reflects
the	sunlight	as	completely	as	if	it	were	solid.	with	this	understanding	of	the	rings	it	is	easy
to	see	why	they	are	so	thin.	like	jupiter,	saturn	is	greatly	flattened	at	the	poles,	and	this
flatteningorrathertheprotuberant	massabouttheequatorlaysholdofeverysatellite
near	the	planet	and	exerts	upon	it	a	direct	force	tending	to	thrust	it	down	into	the	plane	of
the	planet’s	equator	and	hold	it	there.	the	ring	lies	in	the	plane	of	saturn’s	equator	because
each	particle	is	constrained	to	move	there.
the	division	of	the	ring	into	two	parts,	an	outer	and	an	inner	ring,	is	usually	explained	as
follows:	saturn	is	surrounded	by	a	numerous	brood	of	satellites,	which	by	their	attractions
produce	perturbations	in	the	material	composing	the	rings,	and	the	dividing	line	between
the	outer	and	inner	rings	falls	at	the	place	where	by	the	law	of	gravitation	the	perturbations
would	have	their	greatest	effect.	the	dividing	line	between	the	rings	is	therefore	a	narrow
lane2,400	miles	widefrom	whichthefragmentshavebeensweptcleanawaybythe
perturbing	action	of	the	satellites.	less	conspicuous	divisions	are	seen	from	time	to	time	in
other	parts	of	the	ring,	where	the	perturbations,	though	less,	are	still	appreciable.	but	it	is
open	to	some	question	whether	this	explanation	is	sufficient.
thecuriousdarknessoftheinnerorcraperingiseasilyexplainedtheparticles
composing	it	are	not	packed	together	so	closely	as	in	the	outer	ring,	and	therefore	reflect
lesssunlightindeedsosparselystrewnaretheparticlesinthisringthatitisingreat
measure	transparent	to	the	sunlight,	as	is	shown	by	a	recorded	observation	of	one	of	the
satellites	which	was	distinctly	although	faintly	seen	while	moving	through	the	shadow	of
the	dark	ring,	but	disappeared	in	total	eclipse	when	it	entered	the	shadow	cast	by	the	bright
ring.
144.	the	ball	of	saturn.—the	ballofthe	planetisin	mostrespectsasmallercopy	of
jupiter.	with	an	equatorial	diameter	of	76,000	miles,	a	polar	diameter	of	69,000	miles,	and
a	mass	95	times	that	of	the	earth,	its	density	is	found	to	be	the	least	of	any	planet	in	the
solar	system,	only	0.70	of	the	density	of	water,	and	about	one	half	as	great	as	is	the	density
of	jupiter.	the	force	of	gravity	at	its	surface	is	only	a	little	greater	(1.18)	than	on	the	earth;
andthisinconnectionwiththelowdensityleadsasinthecaseofjupitertothe
conclusion	that	the	planet	must	be	mainly	composed	of	gases	and	vapors,	very	hot	within,
but	inclosed	by	a	shell	of	clouds	which	cuts	off	their	glow	from	our	eyes.
likejupiterinanotherrespecttheplanetturnsveryswiftlyuponitsaxismakinga
revolutioninhoursminutesbutuptothepresentitremainsunknownwhether
different	parts	of	the	surface	have	different	rotation	times.
145.	thesatellites.—saturnisattendedbyafamilyofninesatellitesalargernumber
than	belongs	to	any	other	planet,	but	with	one	exception	they	are	exceedingly	small	and
difficult	to	observe	save	with	a	very	large	telescope.	indeed,	the	latest	one	is	said	to	have
been	discovered	in	1898	by	means	of	the	image	which	it	impressed	upon	a	photographic
plate,	and	it	has	never	been	seen.
titanthelargestofthemisdistant771,000	milesfromtheplanetandbears	muchthe
same	relation	to	saturn	that	satellite	iii	bears	to	jupiter,	the	similarity	in	distance,	size	and
mass	beingratherstriking,	although,	of	coursethe	smaller	mass	of	saturn	as	compared
with	jupiter	makes	the	periodic	time	of	titan—15	days	23	hours—much	greater	than	that
of	iii.	can	you	apply	kepler’s	third	law	to	the	motion	of	titan	so	as	to	determine	from
the	data	given	above,	the	time	required	for	a	particle	at	the	outer	or	inner	edge	of	the	ring
to	revolve	once	around	saturn?
japetus,	the	second	satellite	in	point	of	size,	whose	distance	from	saturn	is	about	ten	times
as	great	as	the	moon’s	distance	from	the	earth,	presents	the	remarkable	peculiarity	of	being
always	brighter	in	one	part	of	its	orbit	than	in	another,	three	or	four	times	as	bright	when
westof	saturnas	when	eastofit.	this	probablyindicatesthatlike	our	own	moonthe
satelliteturnsalwaysthesamefacetowarditsplanetandfurtherthatonesideofthe
satellitereflectsthe	sunlight	much	betterthanthe	otherside—i.	e.,	has	a	higher	albedo.
with	these	two	assumptions	it	is	easily	seen	that	the	satellite	will	always	turn	toward	the
earthonefacewhenwestandtheotherfacewheneastofsaturnandthusgivethe
observed	difference	of	brightness.
uranus	and	neptune
146.	chief	characteristics.—thetworemaininglargeplanetsareinterestingchieflyas
modern	additions	to	the	known	members	of	the	sun’s	family.	the	circumstances	leading	to
the	discovery	of	neptune	have	been	touched	upon	in	chapter	iv,	and	for	uranus	we	need
only	notethatit	wasfound	by	accidentinthe	year	1781	by	william	herschel,	whofor
some	time	after	the	discovery	considered	it	to	be	only	a	comet.	it	was	the	first	planet	ever
discovered,	all	of	its	predecessors	having	been	known	from	prehistoric	times.
william	herschel	(1738-1822).
william	herschel	(1738-1822).
uranus	has	four	satellites,	all	of	them	very	faint,	which	present	only	one	feature	of	special
importance.	instead	of	moving	in	orbits	which	are	approximately	parallel	to	the	plane	of
the	ecliptic,	as	do	the	satellites	of	the	inner	planets,	their	orbit	planes	are	tipped	up	nearly
perpendiculartothe	planes	ofthe	orbits	of	both	uranus	andthe	earth.	the	onesatellite
which	neptune	possesses	hasthe	same	peculiarityin	even	greater	degreeforits	motion
around	the	planet	takes	place	in	the	direction	opposite	to	that	in	which	all	the	planets	move
around	the	sun,	much	as	if	the	orbit	of	the	satellite	had	been	tipped	over	through	an	angle
ofturnawatchfacedownandnotehowthehandsgoroundinthedirection
opposite	to	that	in	which	they	moved	before	the	face	was	turned	through	180°.
bothuranusandneptunearetoodistanttoallowmuchdetailtobeseenupontheir
surfaces,	but	the	presence	of	broad	absorption	bands	in	their	spectra	shows	that	they	must
possess	dense	atmospheres	quite	different	in	constitution	from	the	atmosphere	of	the	earth.
inrespectofdensityandtheforce	ofgravityattheirsurfacestheyarenotvery	unlike
saturnalthoughtheirdensityisgreaterandgravitylessthanhisleadingtothe
supposition	that	they	are	for	the	most	part	gaseous	bodies,	but	cooler	and	probably	more
nearly	solid	than	either	jupiter	or	saturn.
under	favorable	circumstances	uranus	may	be	seen	with	the	naked	eye	by	one	who	knows
just	where	to	look	for	it.	neptune	is	never	visible	save	in	a	telescope.
147.	theinner	planets.—insharpcontrast	withthegiantplanets	which	wehavebeen
consideringstandsthegroupoffourinnerplanetsorfiveif	wecountthe	moonasan
independent	body,	which	resemble	each	other	in	being	all	small,	dense,	and	solid	bodies,
which	by	comparison	withthe	great	distances	separatingthe	outer	planets	may	fairly	be
described	as	huddled	together	close	to	the	sun.	their	relative	sizes	are	shown	in	fig.	84,
togetherwiththenumericaldataconcerningsizemassdensityetcwhichwehave
already	found	important	for	the	understanding	of	a	planet’s	physical	condition.
venus
fig.	94.—the	phases	of	venus.—antoniadi.
fig.	94.—the	phases	of	venus.—antoniadi.
148.	appearance.—omitting	the	earth,	venus	is	by	far	the	most	conspicuous	member	of
thisgroupand	whenatitsbrightestis,	withexceptionofthesunand	moonthe	most
brilliantobjectintheskyand	may	beseen	withthe	nakedeyein	broad	daylightifthe
observerknowsjustwheretolookforitbutitsbrilliancyissubjecttoconsiderable
variations	on	account	of	its	changing	distance	from	the	earth,	and	the	apparent	size	of	its
disk	varies	forthe	same	reason,	as	may	be	seen	from	fig.	94.	these	drawings	bring	out
well	the	phases	of	the	planet,	and	the	student	should	determine	from	fig.	17	what	are	the
relative	positions	in	their	orbits	of	the	earth	and	venus	at	which	the	planet	would	present
each	of	these	phases.	as	a	guide	to	this,	observe	that	the	dark	part	of	venus’s	earthward
side	is	always	proportional	in	area	to	the	angle	at	venus	between	the	earth	and	sun.	in	the
first	picture	of	fig.	94	about	two	thirds	of	the	surface	corresponding	to	the	full	hemisphere
of	the	planet	is	dark,	and	the	angle	at	venus	between	earth	and	sun	is	therefore	two	thirds
of	180°—i.	e.,	120°.	in	fig.	17	find	a	place	on	the	orbit	of	venus	from	which	if	lines	be
drawn	to	the	sun	and	earth,	as	there	shown,	the	angle	between	them	will	be	120°.	make	a
similarconstructionforthefourthpictureinfigwhichofthesetwopositionsis
farther	from	the	earth?	how	do	the	distances	compare	with	the	apparent	size	of	venus	in
the	two	pictures?	what	is	the	phase	of	venus	to-day?
the	irregularities	in	the	shading	of	the	illuminated	parts	of	the	disk	are	too	conspicuous	in
fig.	94,	on	account	of	difficulties	of	reproductionthese	shadings	are	atthe	best	hardto
see	in	the	telescope,	and	distinct	permanent	markings	upon	the	planet	are	wholly	lacking.
this	absence	of	markings	makes	almost	impossible	a	determination	of	the	planet’s	time	of
rotation	about	its	axis,	and	astronomers	are	divided	in	this	respect	into	two	parties,	one	of
which	maintainsthat	venusliketheearthturnsuponitsaxisinsomeperiodnotvery
different	from	24	hours,	while	the	other	contends	that,	like	the	moon,	it	turns	always	the
same	face	toward	the	center	of	its	orbit,	making	a	rotation	upon	its	axis	in	the	same	period
in	which	it	makes	a	revolution	about	the	sun.	the	reason	why	no	permanent	markings	are
to	be	seen	on	this	planet	is	easily	found.	like	jupiter	and	saturn,	its	atmosphere	is	at	all
times	heavily	cloud-ladensothat	weseldomifeversee	downtothelevel	ofitssolid
parts.	there	is,	however,	no	reason	here	to	suppose	the	interior	parts	hot	and	gaseous.	it	is
much	more	probable	that	venus,	like	the	earth,	possesses	a	solid	crust	whose	temperature
we	should	expect	to	be	considerably	higher	than	that	of	the	earth,	because	venus	is	nearer
thesunbutthecloudlayerinitsatmospheremustmodifythetemperatureinsome
degreeand	we	have	practicallyno	knowledge	oftherealtemperatureconditionsatthe
surface	of	the	planet.
it	is	the	clouds	of	venus	which	in	great	measure	are	responsible	for	its	marked	brilliancy,
since	they	are	an	excellent	medium	for	reflecting	the	sunlight,	and	give	to	its	surface	an
albedo	greater	than	that	of	any	other	planet,	although	saturn	is	nearly	equal	to	it.
of	course,	the	presence	of	such	cloud	formations	indicates	that	venus	is	surrounded	by	a
dense	atmosphere,	and	we	have	independent	evidence	of	this	in	the	shape	of	its	disk	when
the	planet	is	very	nearly	between	the	earth	and	sun.	the	illuminated	part,	from	tip	to	tip	of
the	horns,	then	stretches	more	than	halfway	around	the	planet’s	circumference,	and	shows
thatacertainamountoflightmusthavebeenrefractedthroughitsatmospherethus
making	the	horns	of	the	crescent	appear	unduly	prolonged.	this	atmosphere	is	shown	by
the	spectroscope	to	be	not	unlike	that	of	the	earth,	although,	possibly,	more	dense.
mercury
149.	chief	characteristics.—mercury,	on	account	of	its	nearness	to	the	sun,	is	at	all	times
a	difficult	object	to	observe,	and	copernicus,	who	spent	most	of	his	life	in	poland,	is	said,
despiteallhiseffortstohavegonetohisgravewithouteverseeingitinourmore
southern	latitude	it	can	usually	be	seen	for	about	a	fortnight	at	the	time	of	each	elongation
—ie.,	whenatitsgreatestangulardistancefromthesun—andthestudentshouldfind
from	fig.	16	the	time	at	which	the	next	elongation	occurs	and	look	for	the	planet,	shining
like	a	star	of	the	first	magnitude,	low	down	in	the	sky	just	after	sunset	or	before	sunrise,
according	as	the	elongation	is	to	the	east	or	west	of	the	sun.	when	seen	in	the	morning	sky
the	planet	grows	brighter	day	after	day	untilit	disappearsinthe	sun’s	rays,	whileinthe
evening	sky	its	brilliancy	as	steadily	diminishes	until	the	planet	is	lost.	it	should	therefore
be	looked	for	in	the	evening	as	soon	as	possible	after	it	emerges	from	the	sun’s	rays.
mercury,	as	the	smallest	of	the	planets,	is	best	compared	with	the	moon,	which	it	does	not
greatlysurpassinsizeandwhichitstronglyresemblesinotherrespectscareful
comparisons	oftheamountoflightreflected	bythe	planetin	differentpartsofitsorbit
show	not	only	that	its	albedo	agrees	very	closely	with	that	of	the	moon,	but	also	that	its
light	changes	with	the	varying	phase	of	the	planet	in	almost	exactly	the	same	way	as	the
amount	of	moonlight	changes.	we	maythereforeinferthatitssurfaceislikethat	ofthe
moon,	a	rough	and	solid	one,	with	few	or	no	clouds	hanging	overit,	and	most	probably
covered	with	very	little	or	no	atmosphere.	like	venus,	its	rotation	period	is	uncertain,	with
the	balance	of	probability	favoring	the	view	that	it	rotates	upon	its	axis	once	in	88	days,
and	therefore	always	turns	the	same	face	toward	the	sun.
if	such	is	the	case,	its	climate	must	be	very	peculiar:	one	side	roasted	in	a	perpetual	day,
wherethe	direct	heating	power	ofthe	sun’s	rays,	when	the	planetis	at	perihelionisten
times	as	great	as	on	the	moon,	and	which	six	weeks	later,	when	the	planet	is	at	its	farthest
from	the	sun,	has	fallen	off	to	less	than	half	of	this.	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	planet	there
must	reign	perpetual	night	and	perpetual	cold,	mitigated	by	some	slight	access	of	warmth
fromthe	daysideand	perhapsfeeblyimitatingtherapid	change	ofseason	whichtakes
place	onthe	dayside	ofthe	planet.	this	view,	howevertakes	no	account	ofa	possible
deviation	of	the	planet’s	axis	from	being	perpendicular	to	the	plane	of	its	orbit,	or	of	the
librations	which	must	be	produced	bythe	great	eccentricity	ofthe	orbit,	either	of	which
would	complicate	without	entirely	destroying	the	ideal	conditions	outlined	above.
mars
150.	appearance.—the	oneremaining	member	oftheinner	group,	mars,	hasinrecent
yearsreceived	more	attentionthan	any	other	planetandthe	newspapersand	magazines
haveannounced	marvelousthingsconcerningitthatitisinhabited	byarace	ofbeings
superior	in	intelligence	to	men;	that	the	work	of	their	hands	may	be	seen	upon	the	face	of
theplanetthatweshouldendeavortocommunicatewiththemifindeedtheyarenot
alreadysending	messagestousetc.—allof	whichiscertainlyimportantiftruebutit
restsuponaveryslenderfoundationofevidenceapartofwhichweshallhaveto
consider.
fig.	95.—mars.—schaeberle.	fig.	95.—mars.—schaeberle.
beginning	with	facts	of	which	there	is	no	doubt,	this	ruddy-colored	planet,	which	usually
shinesaboutasbrightlyasastarofthefirst	magnitudesometimesdisplays	morethan
tenfoldthisbrilliancysurpassingevery	otherplanetsave	venusand	presentingatthese
timesespeciallyfavorableopportunitiesforthestudyofitssurface.	theexplanationof
thisincrease	of	brilliancyis,	of	coursethatthe	planet	approaches	unusually	neartothe
earth,	and	we	have	already	seen	from	a	consideration	of	fig.	17	that	this	can	only	happen
in	the	months	of	august	and	september.	the	last	favorable	epoch	of	this	kind	was	in	1894.
from	fig.	17	the	student	should	determine	when	the	next	one	will	come.
fig.	95	presents	nine	drawings	of	the	planet	made	at	one	of	the	epochs	of	close	approach
totheearthandshowsthatitsfacebearscertainfaintmarkingswhichthough
inconspicuousarefixedandpermanentfeaturesoftheplanetthedarktriangular
projection	in	the	lower	half	ofthe	second	drawing	was	seen	and	sketched	by	huyghens,
1659	a.	d.	in	fig.	96	some	of	these	markings	are	shown	much	more	plainly,	but	fig.	95
gives	a	better	idea	of	their	usual	appearance	in	the	telescope.
fig.	96.—four	views	of	mars	differing	90°	in	longitude.—barnard.	fig.	96.—four
views	of	mars	differing	90°	in	longitude.—barnard.
151.	rotation.—itmaybeseenreadilyenoughfromacomparisonofthefirsttwo
sketches	of	fig.	95,	that	the	planet	rotates	about	an	axis,	and	from	a	more	extensive	study
itisfound	to	be	verylikethe	earthinthis	respectturning	oncein	24h.	37m.	around	an
axistippedfrom	being	perpendiculartothe	plane	ofitsorbitabouta	degreeanda	half
more	than	is	the	earth’s	axis.	since	it	is	this	inclination	of	the	axis	which	is	the	cause	of
changingseasons	uponthe	earththere	must	besimilarchanges,	winterandsummeras
well	as	day	and	night,	upon	mars,	only	each	season	is	longer	there	than	here	in	the	same
proportion	thatits	year	islonger	than	ours—i		e.,	nearly	two	to	one.	itis	summer	in	the
northernhemisphereofmarswheneverthesunasseenfrommarsstandsinthat
constellation	which	is	nearest	the	point	of	the	sky	toward	which	the	planet’s	axis	points.
butthis	axis	pointstowardthe	constellation	cygnus,	and	alpha	cygniisthe	bright	star
nearest	the	north	pole	of	mars.	as	pisces	is	the	zodiacal	constellation	nearest	to	cygnus,	it
must	be	summer	in	the	northern	hemisphere	of	mars	when	the	sun	is	in	pisces,	or,	turning
the	proposition	aboutit	must	be	summerinthe	southernhemisphere	of	mars	whenthe
planet,	as	seen	from	the	sun,	lies	in	the	direction	of	pisces.
152.	the	polar	caps.—one	effect	of	the	changing	seasons	upon	mars	is	shown	in	fig.	97,
where	we	have	a	series	of	drawings	of	the	region	about	its	south	pole	made	in	1894,	on
dates	between	may	21st	and	december	10th.	show	from	figthat	duringthistimeit
wassummerintheregionhereshownmarscrossedtheprimeradiusinon
september	5th.	the	striking	thing	in	these	pictures	is	the	white	spot	surrounding	the	pole,
which	shrinks	in	size	from	the	beginning	to	near	the	end	of	the	series,	and	then	disappears
altogether.	the	spot	came	back	again	a	year	later,	and	like	a	similar	spot	at	the	north	pole
oftheplanetitwaxesinthewinterandwanesduringthesummerof	marsinendless
succession.
fig.	97.—the	south	polar	cap	of	mars	in	1894.—barnard.	fig.	97.—the	south	polar
cap	of	mars	in	1894.—barnard.
sir	w.	herschel,	who	studiedthese	appearances	a	century	ago,	comparedthem	withthe
snow	fields	which	every	winter	spread	out	from	the	region	around	the	terrestrial	pole,	and
inthesummermeltandshrinkalthoughwithustheydonotentirelydisappearthis
explanationofthepolarcapsof	marshasbeengenerallyacceptedamongastronomers,
and	from	it	we	may	draw	one	interesting	conclusion:	the	temperature	upon	mars	between
summer	and	winter	oscillates	above	and	below	the	freezing	point	of	water,	as	it	does	in	the
temperate	zones	of	the	earth.	but	this	conclusion	plunges	us	into	a	serious	difficulty.	the
temperature	of	the	earth	is	made	by	the	sun,	and	at	the	distance	of	mars	from	the	sun	the
heating	effect	of	the	latter	is	reduced	to	less	than	half	what	it	is	at	the	earth,	so	that,	if	mars
is	to	be	kept	at	the	same	temperature	as	the	earth,	there	must	be	some	peculiar	means	for
storing	the	solar	heat	and	using	it	more	economically	than	is	done	here.	possibly	there	is
some	such	mechanism,	although	no	one	has	yet	found	it,	and	some	astronomers	are	very
confident	that	it	does	not	exist,	and	assert	that	the	comparison	of	the	polar	caps	with	snow
fieldsismisleadingandthatthetemperatureuponmarsmustbeatleastand
perhaps	200°	or	more,	below	zero.
153.	atmosphere	and	climate.—in	this	connection	one	feature	of	mars	is	of	importance.
themarkingsuponitssurfacearealwaysvisiblewhenturnedtowardtheearththus
showing	thatthe	atmosphere	contains	no	such	amount	of	cloud	as	does	our	own,	but	on
the	wholeis	decidedly	clear	and	sunny,	and	presumably	muchless	densethan	ours.	we
haveseenin	comparingthe	earth	andthe	moon	howimportantistheservice	whichthe
earth’s	atmosphere	renders	in	storing	the	sun’s	heat	and	checking	those	great	vicissitudes
oftemperatureto	whichthe	moonissubjectand	withthisin	mind	we	mustregardthe
smaller	density	and	cloudless	character	ofthe	atmosphere	of	mars	as	unfavorabletothe
maintenance	there	of	a	temperature	like	that	of	the	earth.	indeed,	this	cloudlessness	must
mean	one	of	two	things:	either	the	temperature	is	so	low	that	vapors	can	not	exist	in	any
considerablequantityorthesurface	of	marsisso	drythatthereislittle	waterorother
liquidto	be	evaporated.	thelatter	alternativeis	adopted	bythose	astronomers	who	look
upon	the	polar	caps	as	true	snow	fields,	which	serve	as	the	chief	reservoir	of	the	planet’s
water	supply,	and	who	find	in	fig.	98	evidence	that	as	the	snow	melts	and	the	water	flows
away	over	the	flat,	dry	surface	of	the	planet,	vegetation	springs	up,	as	shown	by	the	dark
markings	on	the	disk,	and	gradually	dies	out	with	the	advancing	season.	note	that	in	the
first	of	these	pictures	the	season	upon	mars	corresponds	to	the	end	of	may	with	us,	and	in
the	last	picture	to	the	beginning	of	august,	a	period	during	which	in	much	of	our	western
countrytheluxuriant	vegetation	of	springis	burned	out	bythe	scorching	sun.	from	this
point	of	view	the	permanent	dark	spots	are	the	low-lying	parts	of	the	planet’s	surface,	in
which	at	all	times	there	is	a	sufficient	accumulation	of	water	to	support	vegetable	life.
fig.	98.—the	same	face	of	mars	at	three	different	seasons.—lowell.
fig.	98.—the	same	face	of	mars	at	three	different	seasons.—lowell.
154.	the	canals.—in	fig.	98	the	lower	part	of	the	disk	of	mars	shows	certain	faint	dark
lineswhicharegenerallycalledcanalsandinplateiiithereisgivenamapof	mars
showing	manyofthesecanalsrunninginnarrowduskystreaksacrossthefaceofthe
planet	according	to	a	pattern	almost	as	geometrical	as	that	of	a	spider’s	web.	this	must	not
betakenfor	a	picture	ofthe	planet’s	appearancein	atelescope.	no	man	ever	saw	mars
look	like	this,	but	the	map	is	useful	as	a	plain	representation	of	things	dimly	seen.	some	of
the	regions	of	this	map	are	marked	mare	(sea),	in	accordance	with	the	older	view	which
regarded	the	darker	parts	of	the	planet—and	of	the	moon—as	bodies	of	water,	but	this	is
nowknowntobeanerrorinbothcasesthecurvedsurfaceofaplanetcannotbe
accurately	reproduced	upon	the	flat	surface	of	paper,	but	is	always	more	or	less	distorted
by	the	various	methods	of	“projecting”	it	which	are	in	use.	compare	the	map	of	mars	in
plate	iii	with	fig.	99,	in	which	the	projection	represents	very	well	the	equatorial	parts	of
the	planet,	but	enormously	exaggerates	the	region	around	the	poles.
itisaremarkablefeature	ofthe	canalsthatthey	all	begin	and	endin	one	ofthese	dark
partsoftheplanet’ssurfacetheyshownolooseendslyingonthebrightpartsofthe
planet.	another	even	more	remarkable	feature	is	that	while	the	larger	canals	are	permanent
features	of	the	planet’s	surface,	they	at	times	appear	“doubled”—i.	e.,	in	place	of	one	canal
two	parallel	ones	side	by	sidelasting	for	atime	andthen	giving	place	againto	a	single
canal.
itisexceedinglydifficulttoframeanyreasonableexplanationofthesecanalsandthe
varied	appearances	which	they	present.	the	source	of	the	wild	speculations	about	mars,	to
which	reference	is	made	above,	is	to	be	found	in	the	suggestion	frequently	made,	half	in
jest	and	half	in	earnest,	that	the	canals	are	artificial	water	courses	constructed	upon	a	scale
vastly	exceeding	any	public	works	upon	the	earth,	and	testifying	to	the	presence	in	mars
ofanadvancedcivilization.	thedistinguisheditalianastronomerschiaparelli,	who	has
studied	these	formations	longer	than	any	one	else,	seems	inclined	to	regard	them	as	water
courseslined	on	either	side	by	vegetation,	which	flourishes	asfar	back	from	the	central
channelaswatercanbesuppliedfromit—aplausibleenoughexplanationifthe
fundamental	difficulty	about	temperature	can	be	overcome.
fig.	99.—a	chart	of	mars,	1898-‘99.—cerulli.
fig.	99.—a	chart	of	mars,	1898-‘99.—cerulli.
plate	iii.	map	of	mars	(after	schiaparelli)
plate	iii.	map	of	mars	(after	schiaparellisatellites.—inoneofthetimesofnearapproachprofessorhallof
washington,	discovered	two	tiny	satellites	revolving	about	mars	in	orbits	so	small	that	the
nearer	one,	phobos,	presents	the	remarkable	anomaly	of	completing	the	circuit	of	its	orbit
in	less	time	than	the	planet	takes	for	a	rotation	about	its	axis.	this	satellite,	in	fact,	makes
three	revolutions	in	its	orbit	while	the	planet	turns	once	upon	its	axis,	and	it	therefore	rises
in	the	west	and	sets	in	the	east,	as	seen	from	mars,	going	from	one	horizon	to	the	other	in
a	little	less	than	6	hours.	the	other	satellite,	deimos,	takes	a	few	hours	more	than	a	day	to
makethecircuitofitsorbitbutthedifferenceissosmallthatitremainscontinuously
abovethe	horizon	ofany	given	place	upon	marsfor	morethan	60	hours	atatimeand
during	this	period	runs	twice	through	its	complete	set	of	phases—new,	first	quarter,	full,
etcinordinarytelescopesthesesatellitescanbeseenonlyunderespeciallyfavorable
circumstances,	and	are	far	too	small	to	permit	of	any	direct	measurement	of	their	size.	the
amount	of	light	which	they	reflect	has	been	compared	with	that	of	mars	and	found	to	be	as
much	inferior	to	it	as	is	polaris	to	two	full	moons,	and,	judging	from	this	comparison,	their
diameters	can	not	much	exceed	a	half	dozen	miles,	unless	their	albedo	is	far	less	than	that
of	mars,	which	does	not	seem	probable.
the	asteroids
156.	minor	planets.—these	may	be	dismissed	with	few	words.	there	are	about	500	of
them	known,	all	discovered	since	the	beginning	of	the	nineteenth	century,	and	new	ones
arestillfoundeveryyearnoonepretendstorememberthenameswhichhavebeen
assignedthemandtheyarecommonlyrepresentedbyanumberinclosedinacircle,
showing	the	order	in	which	they	were	discovered—e.	g.,	➀	=	ceres,	[circle	433]	=	eros,
etc.	for	the	most	part	they	are	little	more	than	chips,	world	fragments,	adrift	in	space,	and
naturally	it	was	the	larger	and	brighter	of	them	that	were	first	discovered.	the	size	of	the
first	four	of	them—ceres,	pallas,	juno,	and	vesta—compared	with	the	size	of	the	moon,
according	to	professor	barnard,	is	shown	in	fig.	100.	the	great	majority	of	them	must	be
muchsmallerthanthesmallestoftheseperhapsnotmorethanascoreofmilesin
diameter.
a	few	of	the	asteroids	present	problems	of	special	interest,	such	as	eros,	on	account	of	its
close	approach	to	the	earth;	polyhymnia,	whose	very	eccentric	orbit	makesit	a	valuable
means	for	determining	the	mass	of	jupiter,	etc.;	but	these	are	special	cases	and	the	average
asteroidnowreceivesscantattentionalthoughhalfacenturyago,	whenonlyafewof
them	were	known,	they	were	regarded	with	much	interest,	and	the	discovery	of	a	new	one
was	an	event	of	some	consequence.
it	wasthen	afavoritespeculationthatthey	wereinfactfragments	ofanill-fated	planet
whichoncefilledthegapbetweentheorbitsof	marsandjupiterbut	whichbysome
mischance,	had	been	blown	into	pieces.	this	is	now	known	to	be	well-nigh	impossible,	for
every	fragment	which	after	the	explosion	moved	in	an	elliptical	orbit,	as	all	the	asteroids
do	move,	would	be	brought	back	once	in	every	revolution	to	the	place	ofthe	explosion,
andalltheasteroidorbitsmustthereforeintersectatthisplacebutthereisnosuch
common	point	of	intersection.
fig.	100.—the	size	of	the	first	four	asteroids.—barnard.	fig.	100.—the	size	of	the
first	four	asteroids.—barnard.
157.	life	on	the	planets.—there	is	a	belief	firmly	grounded	in	the	popular	mind,	and	not
withoutitsadvocatesamong	professionalastronomersthattheplanetsareinhabitedby
livingandintelligentbeingsanditseemsproperatthecloseofthischaptertoinquire
briefly	how	far	the	facts	and	principles	here	developed	are	consistent	with	this	belief,	and
what	support,	if	any,	they	lend	to	it.
at	the	outset	we	must	observe	that	the	word	life	is	an	elastic	term,	hard	to	define	in	any
satisfactory	way,	and	yet	standing	for	something	which	we	know	here	upon	the	earth.	it	is
this	idea,	our	familiar	though	crude	knowledge	of	life,	which	lies	at	the	root	of	the	matter.
life,	if	it	exists	in	another	planet,	must	be	in	its	essential	character	like	life	upon	the	earth,
and	must	at	least	possess	those	features	which	are	common	to	all	forms	of	terrestrial	life.	it
is	an	abuse	of	language	to	say	that	life	in	mars	may	be	utterly	unlike	life	in	the	earth;	if	it
is	absolutely	unlike,	it	is	not	life,	whatever	else	it	may	be.	now,	every	form	of	life	found
upon	the	earth	has	for	its	physical	basis	a	certain	chemical	compound,	called	protoplasm,
which	can	exist	and	perpetuate	itself	only	within	a	narrow	range	of	temperature,	roughly
speakingbetweenandcentigradealthoughtheselimitscanbeconsiderably
overstepped	for	short	periods	of	time.	moreover,	this	protoplasm	can	be	active	only	in	the
presenceofwaterorwatervaporandwemaythereforeestablishasthenecessary
conditionsforthecontinuedexistenceandreproductionoflifeinanyplacethatits
temperaturemustnotbepermanentlyaboveorbelowcandwatermustbe
present	in	that	place	in	some	form.
with	these	conditions	before	us	it	is	plain	that	life	can	not	exist	in	the	sun	on	account	of	its
high	temperature.	itis	conceivable	that	active	and	intelligent	beings,	salamanders,	might
existtherebuttheycouldnotproperlybesaidtoliveinjupiterandsaturnthesame
condition	of	high	temperature	prevails,	and	probably	also	in	uranus	and	neptune,	so	that
it	seems	highly	improbable	that	any	of	these	planets	should	be	the	home	of	life.
oftheinnerplanetsmercuryandthemoonseemdestituteofanyconsiderable
atmospheres,	and	arethereforelackinginthe	supply	of	water	necessary	forlife,	andthe
sameisalmostcertainlytrueofalltheasteroidsthereremainvenusmarsandthe
satellites	of	the	outer	planets,	which	latter,	however,	we	must	drop	from	consideration	as
beingtoolittleknown.	on	venusthereisanatmosphereprobablycontainingvaporof
water,	and	it	is	well	within	the	range	of	possibility	that	liquid	water	should	exist	upon	the
surface	ofthis	planet	andthatitstemperature	shouldfall	withinthe	prescribedlimitsit
would,	however,	be	straining	our	actual	knowledgeto	affirmthat	suchisthe	case,	orto
insist	that	if	such	were	the	case,	life	would	necessarily	exist	upon	the	planet.
on	mars	we	encounter	the	fundamental	difficulty	of	temperature	already	noted	in	§	152.	if
in	some	unknown	way	the	temperature	is	maintained	sufficiently	high	for	the	polar	caps	to
be	real	snow,	thawing	and	forming	again	with	the	progress	of	the	seasons,	the	necessary
conditionsoflife	wouldseemtobefulfilledhereandlifeifonceintroduceduponthe
planet	might	abide	and	flourish.	but	of	positive	proof	that	such	is	the	case	we	have	none.
onthe	wholeoursurveylendslittleencouragementtothebeliefinplanetarylifefor
aside	from	the	earth,	of	all	the	hundreds	of	bodies	in	the	solar	system,	not	one	is	found	in
which	the	necessary	conditions	of	life	are	certainly	fulfilled,	and	only	two	exist	in	which
there	is	a	reasonable	probability	that	these	conditions	may	be	satisfied.

chapter	xii
comets	and	meteors
158.	visitors	in	the	solar	system.—all	of	the	objects—sun,	moon,	planets,	stars—which
we	have	thus	far	had	to	consider,	are	permanent	citizens	of	the	sky,	and	we	have	no	reason
to	suppose	that	their	present	appearance	differs	appreciably	from	what	it	was	1,000	years
oryearsagobutthereisanotherclassofobjects—cometsmeteors—which
appearunexpectedlyarevisibleforatimeandthenvanishandareseenno	more.	on
account	of	this	temporary	character	the	astronomers	of	ancient	and	mediæval	times	for	the
most	part	refused	to	regard	them	as	celestial	bodies	but	classed	them	along	with	clouds,
fogsjack-o’-lanternsandfirefliesasexhalationsfromtheswampsorthevolcano;
admittingthemtobeindeedimportantasharbingersofevilto	mankindbuthavingno
especial	significance	for	the	astronomer.
the	comet	of	1618	a.	d.	inspired	the	lines—
“eight	things	there	be	a	comet	brings,
when	it	on	high	doth	horrid	range:
wind,	famine,	plague,	and	death	to	kings,
war,	earthquakes,	floods,	and	direful	change,”
which,	accordingto	white	(history	ofthe	doctrine	of	comets),	wereto	betaughtin	all
seriousness	to	peasants	and	school	children.
it	was	by	slow	degrees,	and	only	after	direct	measurements	of	parallax	had	shown	some	of
them	to	be	more	distant	than	the	moon,	that	the	tide	of	old	opinion	was	turned	and	comets
weretransferredfromthesublunarytothecelestialsphereandinmorerecenttimes
meteors	also	have	been	recognized	as	coming	to	us	from	outside	the	earth.	a	meteor,	or
shootingstarasitisoftencalledisone	ofthecommonestofphenomenaand	onecan
hardly	watch	the	sky	for	an	hour	on	any	clear	and	moonless	night	without	seeing	several
ofthosequickflashesoflightwhichlookasifsomestarhadsuddenlyleftitsplace,
dashedswiftlyacrossaportionoftheskyandthenvanisheditisthismisleading
appearance	that	probably	is	responsible	for	the	name	shooting	star.
fig.	101.—donati’s	comet.—bond.
fig.	101.—donati’s	comet.—bond.
159.	comets.—cometsarelesscommonandmuchlonger-livedthanmeteorslasting
usually	for	several	weeks,	and	may	be	visible	night	after	night	for	many	months,	but	never
for	many	years,	at	a	time.	during	the	last	decade	there	is	no	year	in	which	less	than	three
comets	have	appeared,	and	1898	is	distinguished	by	the	discovery	of	ten	of	these	bodies,
the	largest	number	ever	found	in	one	year.	on	the	average,	we	may	expect	a	new	comet	to
be	found	about	once	in	every	ten	weeks,	but	for	the	most	part	they	are	small	affairs,	visible
only	in	the	telescope,	and	a	fine	large	one,	like	donati’s	comet	of	1858	(fig.	101),	or	the
great	cometofseptember1882,	which	wasvisibleinbroaddaylightclosebesidethe
sun,	is	a	rare	spectacle,	and	as	striking	and	impressive	as	it	is	rare.
fig.	102.—some	famous	comets.	fig.	102.—some	famous	comets.
note	in	fig.	102	the	great	variety	of	aspect	presented	by	some	of	the	more	famous	comets,
which	are	here	represented	upon	a	very	small	scale.
fig.	103	is	from	a	photograph	of	one	of	the	faint	comets	of	the	year	1893,	which	appears
hereasaratherfeeblestreakoflightamidthestarswhicharescatteredoverthe
background	of	the	picture.	an	apparently	detached	portion	of	this	comet	is	shown	at	the
extremeleftofthepicturelookingalmostlikeanotherindependentcomettheclean,
straightlinerunningdiagonallyacrossthepictureistheflashofabrightmeteorthat
chanced	to	pass	within	the	range	of	the	camera	while	the	comet	was	being	photographed.
fig.	103.—brooks’s	comet,	november	13,	1893.	barnard.	fig.	103.—brooks’s	comet,
november	13,	1893.	barnard.
a	morestrikingrepresentationofa	moderatelybrighttelescopiccometiscontainedin
figsandwhichpresenttwodifferentviewsofthesamecometshowinga
considerablechangeinitsappearance.	astrikingfeature	of	figisthestarimages,
which	are	here	drawn	out	into	short	lines	all	parallel	with	each	other.	during	the	exposure
of	2h.	20mrequiredtoimprintthis	picture	uponthe	photographic	platethe	comet	was
continually	changing	its	position	among	the	stars	on	account	of	its	orbital	motion,	and	the
platewastherefore	movedfromtimetotimesoastofollowthecometand	makeits
image	always	fall	at	the	same	place.	hence	the	plate	was	continually	shifted	relative	to	the
stars	whose	images,	drawn	out	into	lines,	show	the	direction	in	which	the	plate	was	moved
—i.	ethe	directionin	whichthe	comet	was	moving	acrossthesky.	the	same	effectis
shownintheotherphotographsbutlessconspicuouslythanhereonaccountoftheir
shorter	exposure	times.
these	pictures	all	show	that	one	end	of	the	comet	is	brighter	and	apparently	more	dense
than	the	other,	and	it	is	customary	to	call	this	bright	part	the	head	of	the	comet,	while	the
brushlike	appendage	that	streams	away	from	it	is	called	the	comet’s	tail.
160.	the	parts	of	a	comet.—it	is	not	every	comet	that	has	a	tail,	though	all	the	large	ones
doandinfigthedetachedpieceofcometarymatterattheleftofthepicture
represents	very	well	the	appearance	of	a	tailless	comet,	a	rather	large	but	not	very	bright
starofafuzzyorhairyappearancethewordcometmeanslong-hairedorhairystar.
something	of	this	vagueness	of	outline	is	found	in	all	comets,	whose	exact	boundaries	are
hardtodefineinsteadofbeingsharpandclean-cutlikethoseofaplanetorsatellite.
often,	however,	there	is	found	in	the	head	of	a	comet	a	much	more	solid	appearing	part,
like	the	round	white	ball	at	the	center	of	fig.	106,	which	is	called	the	nucleus	of	the	comet,
and	appearsto	bein	some	sortthe	centerfrom	whichits	activitiesradiate.	as	shownin
figsandthenucleusissometimessurroundedby	whatarecalledenvelopes,
whichhavetheappearanceofsuccessive	wrappingsorhalosplacedaboutitandodd,
spurlike	projections,	called	jets,	are	sometimes	found	in	connection	with	the	envelopes	or
in	place	of	them.	these	figures	also	show	what	is	quite	a	common	characteristic	of	large
comets,	a	dark	streak	running	down	the	axis	of	the	tail,	showing	that	the	tail	is	hollow,	a
mere	shell	surrounding	empty	space.
fig.	104.—swift’s	comet,	april	17,	1892.—barnard.
fig.	104.—swift’s	comet,	april	17,	1892.—barnard.
the	amount	of	detail	shown	in	figs.	106	and	107	is,	however,	quite	exceptional,	and	the
ordinarycometismuchmorelikefigorevenagreatcometwhenitfirst
appearsisnotunlikethedetachedfragmentinfigafaintandroundishpatchof
foggylight	which	growsthrough	successive	stagestoits	maximum	estate,	developing	a
tail,	nucleus,	envelopes,	etc.,	only	to	lose	them	again	as	it	shrinks	and	finally	disappears.
fig.	105.—swift’s	comet,	april	24,	1892.—barnard.
fig.	105.—swift’s	comet,	april	24,	1892.—barnard.
161.	the	orbits	of	comets.—it	will	berememberedthat	newton	found,	as	atheoretical
consequence	of	the	law	of	gravitation,	that	a	body	moving	under	the	influence	of	the	sun’s
attractionmighthaveasitsorbitanyoneoftheconicsectionsellipseparabolaor
hyperbola,	and	among	the	400	and	more	comet	orbits	which	have	been	determined	every
oneoftheseorbitformsappearsbutcuriouslyenoughthereisnotahyperbolaamong
themwhichifdrawnuponpapercouldbedistinguishedbytheunaidedeyefroma
parabolaandtheellipsesareallsolongandnarrownotoneofthembeingsonearly
round	as	is	the	most	eccentric	planet	orbit,	that	astronomers	are	accustomed	to	look	upon
the	parabola	as	being	the	normal	type	of	comet	orbit,	and	to	regard	a	comet	whose	motion
differs	much	from	a	parabola	as	being	abnormal	and	calling	for	some	special	explanation.
fig.	106.—head	of	coggia’s	comet,	july	13,	1874.—trouvelot.	fig.	106.—head	of
coggia’s	comet,	july	13,	1874.—trouvelot.
the	fact	that	comet	orbits	are	parabolas,	or	differ	but	little	from	them,	explains	at	once	the
temporarycharacterandspeedydisappearanceofthesebodiestheyarevisitorstothe
solar	system	and	visible	for	only	a	short	time,	because	the	parabola	in	which	they	travel	is
notaclosedcurveandthecomethaving	passed	oncealongthatportion	ofitnearthe
earth	and	the	sun,	moves	off	along	a	path	which	ever	thereafter	takes	it	farther	and	farther
away,	beyondthelimit	of	visibility.	the	development	ofthe	comet	duringthetimeitis
visiblethegrowthanddisappearanceoftailnucleusetcdependuponitschanging
distancefromthesunthehighestdevelopmentandmostcomplexstructurebeing
presented	when	it	is	nearest	to	the	sun.
figshowsthe	path	ofthe	great	comet	of1882	duringthe	periodin	whichit	was
seenfromseptemberto	maythesedates—ixandv26—are
markedinthefigureoppositethepartsoftheorbitinwhichthecometstoodatthose
timessimilarlythepositionsoftheearthinitsorbitatthebeginningofseptember,
october,	november,	etc.,	are	marked	by	the	roman	numerals	ix,	x,	xi,	etc.	the	line	s	v
shows	the	direction	from	the	sun	to	the	vernal	equinox,	and	s	ω	is	the	line	along	which	the
plane	ofthe	comet’s	orbitintersectsthe	plane	ofthe	earth’s	orbit—i.	eitistheline	of
nodes	of	the	comet	orbit.	since	the	comet	approached	the	sun	from	the	south	side	of	the
ecliptic,	all	ofits	orbitsavethelittlesegment	whichfallstotheleft	of	slies	below
(south)	of	the	plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit,	and	the	part	which	would	be	hidden	if	this	plane
were	opaque	is	represented	by	a	broken	line.
fig.	107.—head	of	donati’s	comet,	september	30,	october	2,	1858.—bond.	fig.	107.
—head	of	donati’s	comet,	september	30,	october	2,	1858.—bond.
162.	elementsofacomet’sorbit.—thereisatheoremofgeometrytotheeffectthat
throughanythreepointsnotinthesamestraightlineonecircleandonlyonecanbe
drawn.	corresponding	to	thisthere	is	atheorem	of	celestial	mechanicsthatthrough	any
three	positions	of	a	comet	one	conic	section,	and	only	one,	can	be	passed	along	which	the
comet	can	move	in	accordance	with	the	law	of	gravitation.	this	conic	section	is,	of	course,
its	orbit,	and	at	the	discovery	of	a	comet	astronomers	always	hasten	to	observe	its	position
inthe	sky	on	different	nightsin	orderto	obtainthethree	positions	(right	ascensions	and
declinations)	necessary	for	determining	the	particular	orbit	in	which	it	moves.	the	circle,
to	which	reference	was	made	above,	is	completely	ascertained	and	defined	when	we	know
itsradiusandthepositionofitscenteraparabolaisnotsosimplydefinedandfive
numberscalledtheelementsofitsorbitarerequiredtofixaccuratelyacomet’spath
around	the	sun.	two	of	these	relate	to	the	position	of	the	line	of	nodes	and	the	angle	which
the	orbit	plane	makes	with	the	plane	of	the	ecliptic;	a	third	fixes	the	direction	of	the	axis	of
the	orbit	in	its	plane,	and	the	remaining	two,	which	are	of	more	interest	to	us,	are	the	date
atwhichthecomet	makesitsnearestapproachtothesun(perihelionpassageandits
distance	from	the	sun	at	that	date	(perihelion	distance).	the	date,	september	17th,	placed
near	the	center	of	fig.	108,	is	the	former	of	these	elements,	while	the	latter,	which	is	too
small	to	be	accurately	measured	here,	may	be	found	from	fig.	109	to	be	0.82	of	the	sun’s
diameter,	or,	in	terms	of	the	earth’s	distance	from	the	sun,	0.008.
fig.	108.—orbits	of	the	earth	and	the	great	comet	of	1882.
fig.	108.—orbits	of	the	earth	and	the	great	comet	of	1882.
fig.	109	shows	on	a	large	scale	the	shape	of	that	part	of	the	orbit	near	the	sun	and	gives
the	successive	positions	of	the	comet,	at	intervals	of	2/10	of	a	day,	on	september	16th	and
17th,	showing	that	in	less	than	10	hours—17.0	to	17.4—the	comet	swung	around	the	sun
through	an	angle	of	more	than	240°.	when	at	its	perihelion	it	was	moving	with	a	velocity
of	300	miles	per	second!	this	very	unusual	velocity	was	due	to	the	comet’s	extraordinarily
close	approach	to	the	sun.	the	earth’s	velocity	in	its	orbit	is	only	19	miles	per	second,	and
the	velocity	of	any	comet	at	any	distancefromthe	sun,	providedits	orbitis	a	parabola,
may	be	found	by	dividing	this	number	by	the	square	root	of	halfthe	comet’s	distance—
e.	g.,	300	miles	per	second	equals	19	÷	√	0.004.
fig.	109.—motion	of	the	great	comet	of	1883	in	passing	around	the	sun.
fig.	109.—motion	of	the	great	comet	of	1883	in	passing	around	the	sun.
most	of	the	visible	comets	have	their	perihelion	distances	included	between	1/3	and	4/3	of
the	earth’s	distance	from	the	sun,	but	occasionally	one	is	found,	like	the	second	comet	of
1885,	whose	nearest	approach	to	the	sun	lies	far	outside	the	earth’s	orbit,	in	this	case	half-
way	out	to	the	orbit	of	jupiter;	but	such	a	comet	must	be	a	very	large	one	in	order	to	be
seen	at	all	from	the	earth.	there	is,	however,	some	reason	for	believing	that	the	number	of
comets	which	movearoundthesun	withoutevercominginsidetheorbitofjupiteror
even	that	of	saturn,	is	much	larger	than	the	number	of	those	which	come	close	enough	to
be	discovered	from	the	earth.	in	any	case	we	are	reminded	of	kepler’s	saying,	that	comets
in	the	sky	are	as	plentiful	as	fishes	in	the	sea,	which	seems	to	be	very	little	exaggerated
when	we	considerthat,	according	to	kleiber,	out	of	allthe	comets	which	enterthe	solar
system	probably	not	more	than	2	or	3	per	cent	are	ever	discovered.
fig.	110.—the	great	comet	of	1843.
fig.	110.—the	great	comet	of	1843.
163.	dimensions	of	comets.—the	comet	whose	orbit	is	shown	in	figs.	108	and	109	is	the
finest	and	largest	that	has	appeared	in	recent	years.	its	tail,	which	at	its	maximum	extent
would	have	morethan	bridgedthespace	betweensun	and	earth(100,000,000	milesis
made	very	much	too	shortin	fig.	109,	but	when	atits	best	was	probably	notinferiorto
thatofthegreatcometofshowninfigasweshallseelaterthereisa
peculiar	and	special	relationship	between	these	two	comets.
the	head	of	the	comet	of	1882	was	not	especially	large—about	twice	the	diameter	of	the
ball	of	saturn—but	its	nucleus,	according	to	an	estimate	made	by	dr.	elkin	when	it	was
very	near	perihelion,	was	as	large	as	the	moon.	the	head	of	the	comet	shown	in	fig.	107
was	too	large	to	be	put	in	the	space	between	the	earth	and	the	moon,	and	the	great	comet
of	1811	had	a	head	considerably	larger	than	the	sun	itself.	from	these	colossal	sizes	down
to	the	smallest	shred	just	visible	in	the	telescope,	comets	of	all	dimensions	may	be	found,
but	the	smaller	the	comet	the	less	the	chance	of	its	being	discovered,	and	a	comet	as	small
as	the	earth	would	probably	go	unobserved	unless	it	approached	very	close	to	us.
164.	the	mass	of	a	comet.—there	is	no	known	case	in	which	the	mass	of	a	comet	has
ever	been	measured,	yet	nothing	aboutthem	is	more	surethanthatthey	are	bodies	with
mass	which	is	attracted	by	the	sun	and	the	planets,	and	which	in	its	turn	attracts	both	sun
and	planets	and	produces	perturbations	in	their	motion.	these	perturbations	are,	however,
too	small	to	be	measured,	although	the	corresponding	perturbations	in	the	comet’s	motion
aresometimesenormousandsincethesemutualperturbationsareproportionaltothe
massesofcometandplanetweareforcedtosaythatbycomparison	withevensuch
small	bodies	as	the	moon	or	mercury,	the	mass	of	a	comet	is	utterly	insignificant,	certainly
notasgreatasaten-thousandthpartofthe	massoftheearthinthecaseofthe	great
comet	ofif	we	leave	its	hundred	million	miles	oftail	out	of	account	and	suppose
the	entire	mass	condensed	into	its	head,	we	find	by	alittle	computation	thatthe	average
densityoftheheadunderthesecircumstances	musthavebeenlessthanofthe
density	of	air.	in	ordinary	laboratory	practice	this	would	be	called	a	pretty	good	vacuum.	a
striking	observation	made	on	september	17,	1882,	goes	to	confirm	the	very	small	density
ofthiscometitisshownin	figthatearlyonthatdaythecometcrossedtheline
joining	earth	and	sun,	and	therefore	passed	in	transit	over	the	sun’s	disk.	two	observers	at
thecapeofgoodhopesawthecometapproachthesunandfolloweditwiththeir
telescopes	until	the	nucleus	actually	reached	the	edge	of	the	sun	and	disappeared,	behind	it
as	they	supposed,	for	no	trace	of	the	comet,	not	even	its	nucleus,	could	be	seen	against	the
sunalthoughit	wascarefullylookedfor.	nowthefigureshowsthatthecometpassed
betweenthe	earth	and	sun,	andits	densest	parts	werethereforetoo	attenuatedto	cut	off
any	perceptible	fraction	of	the	sun’s	rays.	in	other	cases	stars	have	been	seen	through	the
head	of	a	cometshining	apparently	with	undimmedluster,	althoughin	some	casesthey
seem	to	have	been	slightly	refracted	out	of	their	true	positions.
165.	meteors.—before	proceeding	further	with	the	study	of	comets	it	is	well	to	turn	aside
and	consider	their	humbler	relatives,	the	shooting	stars.	on	some	clear	evening,	when	the
moon	is	absent	from	the	sky,	watch	the	heavens	for	an	hour	and	count	the	meteors	visible
during	thattime.	note	their	pathsthe	part	of	the	sky	where	they	appear	and	where	they
disappeartheir	brightness,	and	whether	they	all	move	with	equal	swiftness.	out	of	such
simple	observations	with	the	unaided	eye	there	has	grown	a	large	and	important	branch	of
astronomical	science,	some	parts	of	which	we	shall	briefly	summarize	here.
aparticularmeteorisalocalphenomenonseenoveronlyasmallpartoftheearth’s
surface,	although	occasionally	a	very	big	and	bright	one	may	travel	and	be	visible	over	a
considerable	territory.	such	a	one	in	december,	1876,	swept	over	the	united	states	from
kansastopennsylvaniaandwasseenfromelevendifferentstatesbuttheordinary
shooting	star	is	much	less	conspicuous,	and,	as	we	know	from	simultaneous	observations
made	at	neighboring	placesit	makesits	appearance	at	a	height	of	some	75	miles	above
theearth’ssurfaceoccupiessomethinglikeasecondin	moving	overitspathandthen
disappears	at	a	height	of	about	50	miles	or	more,	although	occasionally	a	big	one	comes
downtotheverysurfaceoftheearth	withforcesufficienttoburyitselfintheground,
from	whichit	maybeduguphandled,	weighedandturnedovertothechemisttobe
analyzed.	the	pieces	thus	found	show	that	the	big	meteors,	at	least,	are	masses	of	stone	or
mineralironisquitecommonlyfoundinthemasareaconsiderablenumberofother
terrestrialsubstancescombinedinratherpeculiarwaysbutnochemicalelementnot
found	on	the	earth	has	ever	been	discovered	in	a	meteor.
166.	nature	of	meteors.—the	swiftness	with	which	the	meteors	sweep	down	shows	that
they	must	comefrom	outsidethe	earthfor	even	halftheir	velocityif	giventothem	by
some	terrestrial	volcano	or	other	explosive	agent,	would	send	them	completely	away	from
theearthnevertoreturnwemustthereforelookuponthemassomanyprojectiles,
bulletsfired	againstthe	earthfrom	some	outside	source	and	arrestedintheir	motion	by
theearth’satmospherewhichservesasacushiontoprotectthegroundfromthe
bombardmentwhichwouldotherwiseproveinthehighestdegreedangeroustoboth
propertyandlifethespeedofthemeteorischeckedbytheresistancewhichthe
atmosphere	offers	to	its	motion,	and	the	energy	represented	by	that	speed	is	transformed
intoheatwhichinlessthanasecondraisesthemeteorandthesurroundingairto
incandescence,	melts	the	meteor	either	wholly	or	in	part,	and	usually	destroys	its	identity,
leavingonlyanimpalpabledust,	whichcoolsoffasitsettlesslowlythroughthelower
atmosphere	to	the	ground.	the	heating	effect	of	the	air’s	resistance	is	proportional	to	the
square	of	the	meteor’s	velocity,	and	even	at	such	a	moderate	speed	as	1	mile	per	second
the	effect	upon	the	meteor	is	the	same	as	if	it	stood	still	in	a	bath	of	red-hot	air.	now,	the
actual	velocity	of	meteors	through	the	air	is	often	30	or	40	times	as	great	as	this,	and	the
corresponding	effect	of	the	air	in	raising	its	temperature	is	more	than	1,000	times	that	of
red	heat.	small	wonder	that	the	meteor	is	brought	to	lively	incandescence	and	consumed
even	in	a	fraction	of	a	second.
167.	the	number	of	meteors.—a	single	observer	may	expect	to	see	in	the	evening	hours
aboutone	meteorevery10	minutesontheaveragealthoughofcourseinthisrespect
muchirregularity	may	occur.	laterinthe	nightthey	become	morefrequentand	after	2
a.	m.	there	are	about	three	times	as	many	to	be	seen	as	in	the	evening	hours.	but	no	one
personcankeepawatchuponthewholeskyhighandlowinfrontandbehindand
experienceshowsthatbyincreasingthenumberofobserversandassigningtoeacha
particularpartoftheskythetotalnumberof	meteorscounted	maybeincreasedabout
five-fold.	sotoothe	observers	at	any	one	place	can	keep	an	effective	watch	upon	only
those	meteors	which	come	into	the	earth’s	atmosphere	within	some	moderate	distance	of
theirstationsayormilesandtowatcheverypartofthatatmospherewould
requirealargenumberofstationsestimatedatsomething	morethanscattered
systematically	over	the	whole	face	of	the	earth.	if	we	piece	together	the	several	numbers
above	considered,	taking	14	as	a	fair	average	of	the	hourly	number	of	meteors	to	be	seen
by	a	single	observer	at	all	hours	of	the	night,	we	shall	find	for	the	total	number	of	meteors
encountered	by	the	earth	in	24	hours,	14	×	5	×	10,000	×	24	=	16,800,000.	without	laying
too	much	stress	upon	this	particular	number,	we	may	fairly	say	that	the	meteors	picked	up
by	the	earth	every	day	are	to	be	reckoned	by	millions,	and	since	they	come	at	all	seasons
of	the	year,	we	shall	have	to	admit	that	the	region	through	which	the	earth	moves,	instead
ofbeingemptyspaceisreallyadustcloudeachindividualparticleofdustbeinga
prospective	meteor.
ontheaveragetheseindividualparticlesareverysmallandveryfarapartacloudof
silverdimeseachaboutmilesfromitsnearestneighborisperhapsafair
representation	oftheiraverage	massand	distancefrom	each	otherbutofcoursegreat
variations	are	to	be	expected	both	in	the	size	and	in	the	frequency	of	the	particles.	there
mustbegreatnumbersofthemthataretoosmallto	makeshootingstarsvisibletothe
naked	eye,	and	such	are	occasionally	seen	darting	by	chance	across	the	field	of	view	of	a
telescope.
168.	the	zodiacallightisaneffectprobably	duetothereflection	ofsunlightfromthe
myriads	of	these	tiny	meteors	which	occupy	the	space	inside	the	earth’s	orbit.	it	is	a	faint
and	diffuse	stream	of	light,	something	like	the	milky	way,	which	may	be	seen	in	the	early
evening	or	morning	stretching	up	from	the	sunrise	or	sunset	point	of	the	horizon	along	the
eclipticandfollowingitscourseformanydegreespossiblyaroundtheentire
circumference	of	the	sky.	it	may	be	seen	at	any	season	of	the	year,	although	it	shows	to	the
best	advantage	in	spring	evenings	and	autumn	mornings.	look	for	it.
169.	great	meteors.—butthere	are	other	meteors,	veritablefireballsin	appearancefar
more	conspicuous	and	imposing	than	the	ordinary	shooting	star.	such	a	one	exploded	over
the	city	of	madrid,	spain,	on	the	morning	of	february	10,	1896,	giving	in	broad	sunlight
“a	brilliant	flash	which	was	followed	ninety	seconds	later	by	a	succession	of	terrific	noises
like	the	discharge	of	a	battery	of	artillery.”	fig.	111	shows	a	large	meteor	which	was	seen
in	californiainthe	early	evening	ofjuly	27,	1894,	and	whichleft	behindit	aluminous
trail	or	cloud	visible	for	more	than	half	an	hour.
notinfrequentlylargemeteorsarefoundtravelingtogethertwoorthreeormorein
company,	making	their	appearance	simultaneously	as	did	the	california	meteor	of	october
22,	1896,	which	is	described	as	triple,	the	trio	following	one	another	like	a	train	of	cars,
and	arago	cites	an	instance,	from	the	year	1830,	where	within	a	short	space	of	time	some
forty	brilliant	meteors	crossed	the	sky,	all	moving	in	the	same	direction	with	a	whistling
noise	and	displaying	in	their	flight	all	the	colors	of	the	rainbow.
the	mass	of	great	meteors	such	as	these	must	be	measured	in	hundreds	if	not	thousands	of
pounds,	and	stories	are	current,	although	not	very	well	authenticated,	of	even	larger	ones,
many	tons	in	weight,	having	been	found	partially	buried	in	the	ground.	of	meteors	which
have	been	actually	seen	to	fall	from	the	sky,	the	largest	single	fragment	recovered	weighs
about	500	pounds,	but	it	is	only	a	fragment	of	the	original	meteor,	which	must	have	been
much	more	massive	before	it	was	broken	up	by	collision	with	the	atmosphere.
fig.	111.—the	california	meteor	of	july	27,	1894.	fig.	111.—the	california	meteor
of	july	27,	1894.
170.	thevelocityofmeteors.—everymeteorbigorlittleissubjecttothelawof
gravitationandbeforeitencounterstheearthmustbemovinginsomekindoforbit
having	the	sun	at	its	focus,	the	particular	species	of	orbit—ellipse,	parabola,	hyperbola—
depending	uponthevelocityand	directionofits	motion.	nowthedirectionin	whicha
meteoris	movingcanbedetermined	withoutseriousdifficultyfrom	observationsofits
apparent	path	across	the	sky	made	by	two	or	more	observers,	but	the	velocity	can	not	be
so	readily	found,	since	the	meteors	go	too	fast	for	any	ordinary	process	of	timing.	but	by
photographing	one	of	them	two	or	three	times	on	the	same	plate,	with	an	interval	of	only	a
tenth	of	a	second	between	exposures,	dr.	elkin	has	succeeded	in	showing,	in	a	few	cases,
thattheirvelocitiesvariedfromtomilespersecondandmusthavebeen
considerably	greater	than	this	before	the	meteors	encountered	the	earth’s	atmosphere.	this
is	a	greater	velocity	than	that	of	the	earth	in	its	orbit,	19	miles	per	second,	as	might	have
been	anticipated,	since	the	mere	fact	that	meteors	can	be	seen	at	all	in	the	evening	hours
showsthatsomeofthematleastmusttravelconsiderablyfasterthantheearthfor,
counting	in	the	direction	of	the	earth’s	motion,	the	region	of	sunset	and	evening	is	always
on	the	rear	side	of	the	earth,	and	meteors	in	order	to	strike	this	region	must	overtake	it	by
theirswiftermotionwehavehereinfactthereasonwhymeteorsareespecially
abundant	in	the	morning	hours;	atthis	time	the	observer	is	on	the	front	side	of	the	earth
which	catchesswiftand	slow	meteors	alike,	whiletherearis	pelted	only	bytheswifter
ones	which	follow	it.
a	comparison	of	the	relative	number	of	morning	and	evening	meteors	makes	it	probable
that	the	average	meteor	moves,	relative	to	the	sun,	with	a	velocity	of	about	26	miles	per
second,	which	is	very	approximately	the	average	velocity	of	comets	when	they	are	at	the
earth’s	distance	from	the	sun.	astronomers,	therefore,	consider	meteors	as	well	as	comets
to	have	the	parabola	and	the	elongated	ellipse	as	their	characteristic	orbitsmeteorshowers—theradiant.—thereisevidentamongmeteorsadistinct
tendency	for	individuals,	to	the	number	of	hundreds	or	even	hundreds	of	millions,	to	travel
together	in	flocks	or	swarms,	all	going	the	same	way	in	orbits	almost	exactly	alike.	this
gregarious	tendency	is	made	manifest	not	only	by	the	fact	that	from	time	to	time	there	are
unusually	abundant	meteoric	displays,	but	also	by	a	striking	peculiarity	of	their	behavior
at	suchtimes.	the	meteors	all	seem	to	come	from	a	particular	part	ofthe	heavens,	asif
here	were	a	hole	in	the	sky	through	which	they	were	introduced,	and	from	which	they	flow
away	in	every	direction,	even	those	which	do	not	visibly	start	from	this	place	having	paths
among	the	stars	whichif	prolonged	backward,	would	passthrough	it.	the	cause	ofthis
appearancemaybeunderstoodfromfigwhichrepresentsagroupofmeteors
moving	together	along	parallel	paths	toward	an	observer	at	d.	traveling	unseen	above	the
earthuntiltheyencountertheupperstrataofitsatmospheretheyherebecome
incandescent	and	speed	on	in	parallel	paths,	1,	2,	3,	4,	5,	6,	which,	as	seen	by	the	observer,
areprojectedbackagainsttheskyintoluminousstreaksthatasisshownbythe
arrowheads,	b,	c,	d,	all	seem	to	radiate	from	the	point	a—i.	efrom	the	pointinthe	sky
whose	direction	from	the	observer	is	parallel	to	the	paths	of	the	meteors.
fig.	112.—explanation	of	the	radiant	of	a	meteoric	shower.—denning.
fig.	112.—explanation	of	the	radiant	of	a	meteoric	shower.—denning.
such	a	display	is	called	a	meteor	shower,	and	the	point	ais	called	its	radiant.	note	how
those	meteors	which	appear	near	the	radiant	all	have	short	paths,	while	those	remote	from
it	in	the	sky	have	longer	ones.	query:	as	the	night	wears	on	and	the	stars	shift	toward	the
west,	will	the	radiant	share	in	their	motion	or	will	it	be	left	behind?	would	the	luminous
part	of	the	path	of	any	of	these	meteors	pass	across	the	radiant	from	one	side	to	the	other?
is	such	a	crossing	ofthe	radiant	possible	under	any	circumstances?	fig.	113	shows	how
the	meteor	paths	are	grouped	around	the	radiant	of	a	strongly	marked	shower.	select	from
it	the	meteors	which	do	not	belong	to	this	shower.
fig.	113.—the	radiant	of	a	meteoric	shower,	showing	also	the	paths	of	three	meteors
which	do	not	belong	to	this	shower.—denning.
fig.	113.—the	radiant	of	a	meteoric	shower,	showing	also	the	paths	of	three	meteors
which	do	not	belong	to	this	shower.—denning.
many	hundreds	of	these	radiants	have	been	observed	in	the	sky,	each	of	which	represents
an	orbit	along	which	a	group	of	meteors	moves,	and	the	relation	of	one	of	these	orbits	to
that	of	the	earth	is	shown	in	fig.	114.	the	orbit	of	the	meteors	is	an	ellipse	extending	out
beyond	the	orbit	of	uranus,	but	so	eccentric	that	a	part	of	it	comes	inside	the	orbit	of	the
earthandthefigureshowsonlythatpartofit	whichliesnearestthesunthe	roman
numerals	whichareplacedalongtheearth’sorbitshowthepositionoftheearthatthe
beginning	of	the	tenth	month,	eleventh	month,	etc.	the	meteors	flow	along	their	orbit	in	a
long	procession,	whose	direction	of	motion	is	indicated	by	the	arrow	heads,	and	the	earth,
coming	in	the	opposite	direction,	plunges	into	this	stream	and	receives	the	meteor	shower
when	it	reaches	the	intersection	of	the	two	orbits.	the	long	arrow	at	the	left	of	the	figure
represents	the	direction	of	motion	of	another	meteor	shower	which	encounters	the	earth	at
this	point.
fig.	114.—the	orbits	of	the	earth	and	the	november	meteors.
fig.	114.—the	orbits	of	the	earth	and	the	november	meteors.
can	you	determine	from	the	figure	answerstothe	following	questions?	on	what	day	of
the	year	will	the	earth	meet	each	of	these	showers?	will	the	radiant	points	of	the	showers
lie	above	or	below	the	plane	of	the	earth’s	orbit?	will	these	meteors	strike	the	front	or	the
rear	of	the	earth?	can	they	be	seen	in	the	evening	hours?
from	many	of	the	radiants	year	after	year,	upon	the	same	day	or	week	in	each	year,	there
comes	a	swarm	of	shooting	stars,	showing	that	there	must	be	a	continuous	procession	of
meteorsmovingalongthisorbitsothatsomearealwaysreadytostriketheearth
whenever	it	reaches	the	intersection	of	its	orbit	with	theirs.	such	is	the	explanation	of	the
showerwhichappearseachyearinthefirsthalfofaugustandwhosemeteorsare
sometimescalledperseidsbecausetheirradiantliesintheconstellationperseusanda
similar	explanation	holds	for	all	the	star	showers	which	are	repeated	year	after	year.
172.	theleonids.—thereishoweverakindofstarshowerofwhichtheleonids
(radiantinleoisthe	mostconspicuoustypeinwhichtheshoweralthoughrepeated
from	year	to	year,	is	much	more	striking	in	some	years	than	in	others.	thus,	to	quote	from
thehistorian“intheshower	was	wellobservedalongthe	wholeeasterncoastof
north	america	from	the	gulf	of	mexico	to	halifax.	the	meteors	were	most	numerous	at
about	5	a.	m.	on	november	13th,	andthe	rising	sun	could	not	blot	out	alltraces	ofthe
phenomena,	for	large	meteors	were	seen	now	and	then	in	full	daylight.	within	the	scope
thattheeyecouldcontain,	morethantwentycould	beseenatatimeshootinginevery
direction.	not	a	cloud	obscured	the	broad	expanse,	and	millions	of	meteors	sped	their	way
acrossineverypointofthecompasstheircoruscationswerebrightgleamingand
incessant,	and	they	fell	thick	as	the	flakes	in	the	early	snows	of	december.”	but,	so	far	as
isknownnoneofthemreachedthegroundanilliteratemanonthefollowingday
remarked:	“the	stars	continued	to	fall	until	none	were	lefti	am	anxious	to	see	how	the
heavens	will	appear	this	evening,	for	i	believe	we	shall	see	no	more	stars.”
aneyewitnessinthesouthernstatesthusdescribestheeffectofthisshoweruponthe
plantation	negroes:	“upward	of	a	hundred	lay	prostrate	upon	the	ground,	some	speechless
and	some	with	the	bitterest	cries,	but	with	their	hands	upraised,	imploring	god	to	save	the
world	and	them.	the	scene	was	truly	awful,	for	never	did	rain	fall	much	thicker	than	the
meteorsfelltowardtheearth—eastwestnorthandsouthitwasthesameinthe
preceding	year	a	similar	but	feebler	shower	from	the	same	radiant	created	much	alarm	in
france,	and	through	the	old	historic	records	its	repetitions	may	be	traced	back	at	intervals
of	33	or	34	years,	although	with	many	interruptions,	to	october	12,	902,	o.	s.,	when	“an
immense	number	of	falling	stars	were	seen	to	spread	themselves	over	the	face	of	the	sky
like	rain.”
suchastarshowerdiffersfromtheonerepeatedeveryyearchieflyinthefactthatits
meteors,	instead	of	being	drawn	out	into	a	long	procession,	are	mainly	clustered	in	a	single
flock	which	may	be	long	enough	to	require	two	or	three	or	four	years	to	pass	a	given	point
ofits	orbit,	but	which	is	far	from	extending	entirely	around	it,	so	that	meteors	from	this
source	are	abundant	only	in	those	years	in	which	the	flock	is	at	or	near	the	intersection	of
its	orbit	with	that	of	the	earth.	the	fact	that	the	leonid	shower	is	repeated	at	intervals	of
33	or	34	years	(it	appeared	in	1799,	1832-‘33,	1866-‘67)	shows	that	this	is	the	“periodic
timeinits	orbit,	whichlatter	must	ofcourse	be	an	ellipseand	presumably	along	and
narrow	one.	it	is	this	orbit	which	is	shown	in	fig.	114,	and	the	student	should	note	in	this
figure	that	if	the	meteor	stream	at	the	point	where	it	cuts	through	the	plane	of	the	earth’s
orbitwereeithernearertoorfartherfromthesunthanistheearththerecouldbeno
shower;	the	earth	and	the	meteors	would	pass	by	without	a	collision.	now,	the	meteors	in
their	motion	are	subject	to	perturbations,	particularly	by	the	large	planets	jupiter,	saturn,
and	uranus,	which	slightly	change	the	meteor	orbit,	and	it	seems	certain	that	the	changes
thus	produced	will	sometimes	thrust	the	swarm	inside	or	outside	the	orbit	of	the	earth,	and
thus	cause	a	failure	of	the	shower	at	times	when	it	is	expected.	the	meteors	were	due	at
thecrossingoftheorbitsin	novemberandandalthoughafew	werethen
seen,	the	shower	was	far	from	being	a	brilliant	one,	and	its	failure	was	doubtless	caused	by
the	outer	planets,	which	switched	the	meteors	aside	from	the	path	in	which	they	had	been
moving	for	a	century.	whetherthey	will	be	again	switched	back	so	asto	produce	future
showers	is	at	the	present	time	uncertain.
173.	captureofthe	leonids.—butafar	morestrikingeffectofperturbationsistobe
found	in	fig.	115,	which	shows	the	relation	ofthe	leonid	orbittothose	ofthe	principal
planets,	and	illustrates	a	curious	chapter	in	the	history	of	the	meteor	swarm	that	has	been
workedoutbymathematicalanalysisandisprobablyaprettygoodaccountofwhat
actually	befell	them.	early	in	the	second	century	of	the	christian	era	this	flock	of	meteors
came	down	toward	the	sun	from	outer	space,	moving	along	a	parabolic	orbit	which	would
have	carried	it	just	inside	the	orbit	of	jupiter,	and	then	have	sent	it	off	to	return	no	more.
but	such	was	not	to	be	its	fate.	as	it	approached	the	orbit	of	uranus,	in	the	year	126	a.	d.,
that	planetchancedto	be	very	nearathand	and	perturbedthe	motion	ofthe	meteorsto
suchanextentthatthecharacteroftheirorbit	wascompletelychangedintotheellipse
showninthefigureandinthisneworbittheyhavemovedfromthattimetothis,
permanent	instead	of	transient	members	of	the	solar	system.	the	perturbations,	however,
did	notend	withthe	yearin	whichthe	meteors	werecaptured	and	annexedtothesolar
systembuteversincethattimejupitersaturnand	uranushavebeenpullingtogether
upon	the	orbit,	and	have	graduallyturned	it	around	intoits	present	position	as	shown	in
the	figure,	and	itis	chieflythis	shifting	ofthe	orbit’s	position	inthethousand	yearsthat
haveelapsedsincea.	dthatmakesthemeteorshowernowcomeinnovember
instead	of	in	october	as	it	did	then.
fig.	115.—supposed	capture	of	the	november	meteors	by	uranus.
fig.	115.—supposed	capture	of	the	november	meteors	by	uranus.
174.	breaking	up	a	meteor	swarm.—how	closely	packed	together	these	meteors	were	at
the	time	of	their	annexation	to	the	solar	system	is	unknown,	but	it	is	certain	that	ever	since
thattimethesun	has	been	exerting	uponthem	atidalinfluencetendingto	break	upthe
swarmanddistributeitsparticlesaroundtheorbitastheperseidsaredistributedand,
given	sufficient	time,	it	will	accomplish	this,	but	up	to	the	present	the	work	is	only	partly
done.	a	certain	number	of	the	meteors	have	gained	so	much	over	the	slower	moving	ones
as	to	have	made	an	extra	circuit	of	the	orbit	and	overtaken	the	rear	of	the	procession,	so
thatthereisathinstream	ofthem	extending	entirely	aroundthe	orbitandfurnishingin
everynovemberaleonidshowerbutbyfarthelargerpartofthe	meteorsstillcling
together,	although	drawn	out	into	a	stream	or	ribbon,	which,	though	very	thin,	is	so	long
that	it	takes	some	three	years	to	pass	through	the	perihelion	of	its	orbit.	it	is	only	when	the
earth	plunges	through	this	ribbon,	as	it	should	inthat	brilliant	leonid
showers	can	be	expected.
175.	relation	of	comets	and	meteors.—it	appearsfrom	the	foregoingthat	meteors	and
comets	move	in	similar	orbits,	and	we	have	now	to	push	the	analogy	alittle	further	and
note	that	in	some	instances	at	least	they	move	in	identically	the	same	orbit,	or	at	least	in
orbits	solikethat	an	appreciable	difference	betweenthem	is	hardlyto	befound.	thus	a
comet	which	was	discovered	and	observed	early	in	the	year	1866,	moves	in	the	same	orbit
with	the	leonid	meteors,	passing	its	perihelion	about	ten	months	ahead	of	the	main	body
of	the	meteors.	if	it	were	set	back	in	its	orbit	by	ten	months’	motion,	it	would	be	a	part	of
themeteorswarmsimilarlytheperseidmeteorshaveacometmovingintheirorbit
actuallyimmersedinthestreamofmeteorparticlesandseveralotherofthemore
conspicuous	star	showers	have	comets	attending	them.
perhaps	the	most	remarkable	case	of	this	character	is	that	of	a	shower	which	comes	in	the
latter	part	of	november	from	the	constellation	andromeda,	and	which	from	its	association
with	the	comet	called	biela	(after	the	name	of	its	discoverer)	is	frequently	referred	to	as
thebielidshowerthiscometaninconspicuousonemovinginanunusuallysmall
ellipticalorbithadbeenobservedatvarioustimesfromdowntowithout
presentinganythingremarkableinitsappearancebutaboutthebeginningofthelatter
yearwithverylittlewarningitbrokeintwoandforthreemonthsthepieceswere
watched	by	astronomers	moving	off,	side	by	side,	something	more	than	half	as	far	apart	as
aretheearthand	moonitdisappeared,	madethecircuitofitsorbitandsix	yearslater
came	back,	with	the	fragments	nearly	ten	times	as	far	apart	as	before,	and	after	a	short	stay
near	the	earth	once	more	disappeared	in	the	distance,	never	to	be	seen	again,	although	the
fragments	should	have	returned	to	perihelion	at	least	half	a	dozen	times	since	then.	in	one
respectthe	orbit	ofthe	comet	wasremarkableit	passedthroughthe	placein	whichthe
earth	stands	on	november	27th	of	each	year,	sothatifthe	comet	were	atthat	particular
partofitsorbitonany	november27thacollisionbetweenitandtheearthwouldbe
inevitable.	so	far	as	is	known,	no	such	collision	with	the	comet	has	ever	occurred,	but	the
bielid	meteorswhicharestrungalongitsorbitdoencountertheearthonthatdatein
greaterorlessabundanceindifferentyearsandare	watched	with	muchinterestbythe
astronomerswholookuponthemasthefinalappearanceofthedébrisofaworn-out
comet.
176.	periodic	comets.—the	biela	comet	is	a	specimen	of	the	type	which	astronomers	call
periodic	comets—i.	e.,	those	which	move	in	small	ellipses	and	have	correspondingly	short
periodictimessothattheyreturnfrequentlyandregularlytoperihelionthecomets
which	accompany	the	other	meteor	swarms—leonids,	perseids,	etc.—also	belong	to	this
class	as	do	some	30	or	40	others	which	have	periodictimeslessthan	a	century.	as	has
beenalreadyindicatedthesedeviationsfromthenormalparabolicorbitcallforsome
special	explanation,	andthe	substance	ofthat	explanationis	containedinthe	account	of
the	leonid	meteors	and	their	capture	by	uranus.	any	comet	may	be	thus	captured	by	the
attraction	of	a	planet	near	which	it	passes.	it	is	only	necessary	that	the	perturbing	action	of
theplanetshouldresultinadiminutionofthecomet’svelocityforwehavealready
learnedthatitisthis	velocity	which	determinesthecharacter	ofthe	orbitand	anything
lessthanthe	velocityappropriatetoaparabola	mustproduceanellipse—ieaclosed
orbit	around	which	the	body	will	revolve	time	after	time	in	endless	succession.	we	note	in
fig.	115	that	when	the	leonid	swarm	encountered	uranus	it	passed	in	front	of	the	planet
and	had	its	velocity	diminished	and	its	orbit	changed	into	an	ellipse	thereby.	it	might	have
passed	behind	uranus,	it	would	have	passed	behind	had	it	come	a	little	later,	and	the	effect
would	then	have	been	justthe	opposite.	its	velocity	would	have	been	increased,	its	orbit
changed	to	a	hyperbola,	and	it	would	have	left	the	solar	system	more	rapidly	than	it	came
into	it,	thrust	out	instead	of	held	in	by	the	disturbing	planet.	of	such	cases	we	can	expect
no	record	to	remain,	but	the	captured	comet	is	its	own	witness	to	what	has	happened,	and
bears	imprinted	upon	its	orbit	the	brand	of	the	planet	which	slowed	down	its	motion.	thus
in	fig.	115	the	changed	orbit	of	the	meteors	has	its	aphelion	(part	remotest	from	the	sun)
quiteclosetotheorbitofuranusandoneofitsnodesthepointinwhichitcuts
throughthe	plane	ofthe	eclipticfrom	northtosouthsideisalso	very	neartothesame
orbit.	it	is	these	two	marks,	aphelion	and	node,	which	by	their	position	identify	uranus	as
the	planet	instrumental	in	capturing	the	meteor	swarm,	and	the	date	of	the	capture	is	found
byworkingbackwiththeirrespectiveperiodictimestoanepochatwhichplanetand
comet	were	simultaneously	near	this	node.
jupiterbyreasonofhisgreatmassisanespeciallyefficientcapturerofcometsand
fig.	116	shows	his	group	of	captives,	his	family	of	comets	as	they	are	sometimes	called.
the	several	orbits	are	marked	with	the	names	commonly	given	to	the	comets.	frequently
thisisthename	oftheirdiscovererbutoftenadifferentsystemisfollowed—egthe
name	1886,	iv,	means	the	fourth	comet	to	pass	through	perihelion	in	the	year	1886.	the
othergreatplanets—saturnuranusneptune—havealsotheirfamiliesofcaptured
comets,	and	according	to	schulhof,	who	does	not	entirely	agree	with	the	common	opinion
about	captured	comets,	the	earth	has	caught	no	less	than	nine	of	these	bodies.
fig.	116.—jupiter’s	family	of	comets.
fig.	116.—jupiter’s	family	of	comets.
177.	comet	groups.—but	there	is	another	kind	of	comet	family,	or	comet	group	as	itis
called,	which	deserves	some	notice,	and	which	is	best	exemplified	by	the	great	comet	ofanditsrelativesnolessthanfourothercometsareknowntobetravelingin
substantially	the	same	orbit	with	this	one,	the	group	consisting	of	comets	1668,	i;	1843,	iiiiitheorbititselfisnotquiteaparabolabutaveryelongated
ellipsewhosemajoraxisandcorrespondingperiodictimecannotbeveryaccurately
determinedfromtheavailabledatabutitcertainlyextendsfarbeyondtheorbitof
neptune,	and	requires	not	less	than	500	years	for	the	comet	to	complete	a	revolution	in	it.
it	was	for	a	time	supposed	that	some	one	of	the	recent	comets	of	this	group	of	five	might
be	a	return	of	the	comet	of	1668	brought	back	ahead	of	time	by	unknown	perturbations.
there	is	still	a	possibility	of	this,	but	it	is	quite	out	of	the	question	to	suppose	that	the	last
four	members	of	the	group	are	anything	other	than	separate	and	distinct	comets	moving	in
practically	the	same	orbit.	this	common	orbit	suggests	a	common	origin	for	the	comets,
but	leaves	us	to	conjecture	how	they	became	separated.
theobservedorbitsofthesefivecometspresentsomeslightdiscordancesamong
themselves,	but	if	we	suppose	each	comet	to	move	in	the	average	of	the	observed	paths	it
is	a	simple	matter	to	fix	their	several	positions	at	the	present	time.	they	have	all	receded
fromthesunnearlyonlinetowardthebrightstarsiriusand	wereallofthematthe
beginning	of	the	year	1900,	standing	nearly	motionless	inside	of	a	space	not	bigger	than
thesunand	distantfromthesunaboutradiioftheearth’sorbit.	the	greatrapidity
with	whichtheysweptthroughthat	part	oftheir	orbit	nearthesun(seeisbeing
compensated	by	the	present	extreme	slowness	of	their	motions,	so	that	the	comets	of	1668
and	1882,	whose	passages	through	the	solar	system	were	separated	by	an	interval	of	more
thantwocenturiesnowstandtogetherneartheaphelionoftheirorbitsseparatedbya
distanceonlypercentgreaterthanthediameterofthe	moon’sorbitandtheywill
continue	substantially	in	this	position	for	some	two	or	three	centuries	to	come.
the	slowness	with	which	these	bodies	move	when	far	from	the	sun	is	strikingly	illustrated
byanequationofcelestialmechanicswhichforparabolicorbitstakestheplaceof
kepler’s	third	law—viz.:
r3	/	t2	=	178,
where	tisthetimein	yearsrequired	forthe	cometto	move	from	its	perihelionto	any
remote	part	of	the	orbit,	whose	distance	from	the	sun	is	represented,	in	radii	of	the	earth’s
orbit,	by	r.	if	the	comet	of	1668	had	moved	in	a	parabola	instead	of	the	ellipse	supposed
above,	how	many	years	would	have	been	required	to	reach	its	present	distance	from	the
sun?
178.	relationofcometstothesolarsystem.—theorbitsofthesecometsillustratea
tendency	which	is	becoming	ever	more	strongly	marked.	because	comet	orbits	are	nearly
parabolas,	it	used	to	be	assumed	that	they	were	exactly	parabolic,	and	this	carried	with	it
the	conclusionthat	comets	havetheir	origin	outsidethesolarsystemit	may	beso,	and
this	view	is	in	some	degree	supported	by	the	fact	that	these	nearly	parabolic	orbits	of	both
comets	and	meteors	are	tipped	at	all	possible	angles	to	the	plane	of	the	ecliptic	instead	of
lying	near	it	as	do	the	orbits	of	the	planets;	and	by	the	further	fact	that,	unlike	the	planets,
the	comets	show	no	marked	tendency	to	move	around	their	orbits	in	the	direction	in	which
the	sun	rotates	upon	his	axis.	there	isin	factthe	utmost	confusion	among	them	in	this
respect,	some	going	one	way	and	some	another.	the	law	of	the	solar	system	(gravitation)
is	impressed	upon	their	movements,	but	its	order	is	not.
butasobservationsgrowmorenumerousandmorepreciseandcometorbitsare
determined	with	increasing	accuracy,	there	is	a	steady	gain	in	the	number	of	elliptic	orbits
at	the	expense	of	the	parabolic	ones,	and	if	comets	are	of	extraneous	origin	we	must	admit
that	a	very	considerable	percentage	of	them	have	their	velocities	slowed	down	within	the
solarsystemperhapsnotso	muchbytheattractionoftheplanetsasbytheresistance
offeredtotheirmotionbymeteorparticlesandswarmsalongtheirpathsastriking
instance	of	what	may	befall	a	comet	in	this	way	is	shown	in	fig.	117,	where	the	tail	of	a
comet	appearssadly	distorted	and	broken	by	whatis	presumedto	have	been	a	collision
witha	meteorswarm.	a	morefamouscaseofimpeded	motionisofferedbythecomet
which	bears	the	name	of	encke.	this	has	a	periodic	time	less	than	that	of	any	other	known
comet,	and	at	intervals	of	forty	months	comes	back	to	perihelion,	each	time	moving	in	a
little	smaller	orbit	than	before,	unquestionably	on	account	of	some	resistance	which	it	has
suffered.
fig.	117.—brooks’s	comet,	october	21,	1893.—barnard.
fig.	117.—brooks’s	comet,	october	21,	1893.—barnard.
179.	the	development	of	a	comet.—we	saw	in	§	174	that	the	sun’s	action	upon	a	meteor
swarm	tends	to	break	it	up	into	a	long	stream,	and	the	same	tendency	to	break	up	is	true	of
comets	whoseattenuatedsubstancepresentsscantresistancetothisforce.	accordingto
the	mathematicalanalysisof	rocheifthecometstoodstillthesun’stidalforce	would
tend	first	to	draw	it	out	on	line	with	the	sun,	just	as	the	earth’s	tidal	force	pulled	the	moon
out	of	shape	(§	42),	andthenit	would	causethelighter	part	ofthe	comet’s	substanceto
flow	away	from	both	ends	of	this	long	diameter.	this	destructive	action	of	the	sun	is	not
limited	to	comets	and	meteor	streams,	for	it	tends	to	tear	the	earth	and	moon	to	pieces	as
well;	but	the	densities	and	the	resulting	mutual	attractions	of	their	parts	are	far	too	great	to
permit	this	to	be	accomplished.
as	a	curiosity	of	mathematical	analysis	we	may	note	that	a	spherical	cloud	of	meteors,	or
dust	particles	weighing	a	gramme	each,	and	placed	atthe	earth’s	distancefromthe	sun,
will	be	broken	up	and	dissipated	by	the	sun’s	tidal	action	if	the	average	distance	between
the	particles	exceeds	two	yards.	now,	the	earth	is	far	more	dense	than	such	a	cloud,	whose
extreme	tenuity,	however,	suggests	what	we	have	already	learned	of	the	small	density	of
cometsandpreparesusintheircaseforanoutflowofparticlesatbothendsofthe
diameter	directed	toward	the	sun.	something	of	this	kind	actually	occurs,	for	the	tail	of	a
cometstreams	out	ontheside	oppositetothesunandin	general	points	awayfromthe
sunasisshownin	figandtheenvelopesandjetsrise	uptowardthesun;	butan
inspectionoffigwillshowthatthetailandtheenvelopearetoounliketobe
produced	by	one	and	the	same	set	of	forces.
it	was	long	ago	suggested	that	the	sun	possibly	exerts	upon	a	comet’s	substance	a	repelling
forcein	additiontothe	attracting	force	which	we	call	gravity.	we	think	naturallyinthis
connection	of	the	repelling	force	which	a	charge	of	electricity	exerts	upon	a	similar	charge
placedonaneighboringbodyandwenotethatifbothsunandcometcarrieda
considerable	store	of	electricity	upon	their	surfaces	this	would	furnish	just	such	a	repelling
force	as	seems	indicated	by	the	phenomena	of	comets’	tails;	for	the	force	of	gravity	would
operatebetweenthesubstanceofsunandcometandonthewholewouldbethe
controlling	force,	whilethe	electric	charges	would	produce	arepulsionrelatively	feeble
for	the	big	particles	and	strong	for	the	little	ones,	since	an	electric	charge	lies	wholly	on
the	surface,	while	gravity	permeatesthe	whole	mass	of	a	body,	andtheratio	of	volume
(gravity)	to	surface	(electric	charge)	increases	rapidly	with	increasing	size.	the	repelling
force	would	thrust	back	toward	the	comet	those	particles	which	flowed	out	toward	the	sun,
whileitwouldurgeforwardthosewhichflowedawayfromitthusproducingthe
differencein	appearance	betweentailand	envelopesthelatter	beingregardedfromthis
standpointasstuntedtailsstronglycurvedbackwardinrecentyearstherussian
astronomer	bredichin	has	made	a	careful	study	of	the	shape	and	positions	of	comets’	tails
and	finds	that	they	fit	with	mathematical	precision	to	the	theories	of	electric	repulsion.
180.	comet	tails.—according	to	bredichin,	a	comet’s	tail	is	formed	by	something	like	the
following	process:	in	the	head	of	the	comet	itself	a	certain	part	of	its	matter	is	broken	up
into	fine	bits,	single	molecules	perhaps,	which,	asthey	no	longer	cling	together,	may	be
described	as	in	the	condition	of	vapor.	by	the	repellent	action	of	both	sun	and	comet	these
moleculesarecastoutfromtheheadofthecometandstreamawayinthedirection
oppositetothesunwithdifferentvelocitiestheheavyonesslowlyandthelightones
faster,	much	as	particles	of	smoke	stream	away	from	a	smokestack,	making	for	the	comet
a	tail	which	like	a	trail	of	smoke	is	composed	of	constantly	changing	particles.	the	result
ofthisprocessisshowninfigwherethepositionsofthecometinitsorbiton
successive	daysare	marked	bythe	roman	numeralsandthe	brokenlinesrepresentthe
paths	of	molecules	mi,	mii,	miii,	etc.,	expelled	from	it	on	their	several	dates	and	traveling
thereafterinorbitsdeterminedbythecombinedeffectofthesun’sattractionthesun’s
repulsionandthecomet’srepulsion.	thecomet’sattraction(gravityistoosmalltobe
takenintoaccountthelinedrawnupwardfromvirepresentsthepositionsofthese
moleculesonthesixthdayandshowsthatallofthemarearrangedinatailpointing
nearlyawayfromthesunasimilarconstructionfortheotherdatesgivesthe
corresponding	positions	of	the	tail,	always	pointing	away	from	the	sun.
fig.	118.—formation	of	a	comet’s	tail.	fig.	118.—formation	of	a	comet’s	tail.
only	the	lightest	kind	of	molecules—e.	g.,	hydrogen—could	drift	away	from	the	comet	so
rapidly	as	is	here	shown.	the	heavier	ones,	such	as	carbon	and	iron,	would	be	repelled	as
stronglybytheelectricforcesbuttheywouldbemorestronglypulledbackbythe
gravitative	forces,	thus	producing	a	much	slower	separation	between	them	and	the	head	of
the	comet.	construct	a	figure	such	as	the	above,	in	which	the	molecules	shall	recede	from
the	comet	only	one	eighth	as	fast	as	in	fig.	118,	and	note	what	a	different	position	it	gives
to	the	comet’s	tail.	instead	of	pointing	directly	away	from	the	sun,	it	will	be	bent	strongly
to	one	side,	as	is	the	large	plume-shaped	tail	of	the	donati	comet	shown	in	fig.	101.	but
observe	that	this	comet	has	also	a	nearly	straight	tail,	like	the	theoretical	one	of	fig.	118.
we	have	heretwo	distincttypes	of	comettailsand	accordingto	bredichinthereisstill
another	but	unusualtype,	even	more	strongly	bentto	one	side	ofthelinejoining	comet
and	sun,	and	appearing	quite	short	and	stubby.	the	existence	of	these	three	types,	and	their
peculiarities	of	shape	and	position,	are	all	satisfactorily	accounted	for	by	the	supposition
thattheyaremadeofdifferentmaterialstherelativemolecularweightsofhydrogen,
someofthehydrocarbonsandironaresuchthattailscomposedofthesemolecules
would	behave	just	as	do	the	actual	tails	observed	and	classified	into	these	three	types.	the
spectroscope	shows	that	these	materials—hydrogen,	hydrocarbons,	and	iron—are	present
incometsandleaveslittleroomfordoubtoftheessentialsoundnessofbredichin’s
theory.
181.	disintegration	of	comets.—we	must	regard	the	tail	as	waste	matter	cast	off	from	the
comet’sheadandalthoughtheamountofthismatterisverysmallitmustinsome
measure	diminish	the	comet’s	mass.	this	process	is,	of	course,	most	active	at	the	time	of
perihelion	passage,	and	if	the	comet	returns	to	perihelion	time	after	time,	as	the	periodic
ones	which	move	in	elliptic	orbits	must	do,	this	waste	of	material	may	become	a	serious
matterleadingultimatelytothecomet’sdestructionitissignificantinthisconnection
that	the	periodic	comets	are	all	small	and	inconspicuous,	not	one	of	them	showing	a	tail	of
any	considerable	dimensions,	and	it	appears	probable	that	they	are	far	advanced	along	the
road	which,	in	the	case	of	biela’s	comet,	led	to	its	disintegration.	their	fragments	are	in
part	strewn	through	the	solar	system,	making	some	small	fraction	ofits	cloud	of	cosmic
dust,	and	in	partthey	have	been	carried	away	from	the	sun	and	scattered	throughoutthe
universe	along	hyperbolic	orbits	impressed	upon	them	at	the	time	they	left	the	comet.
butitisnotthroughthetailonlythatthedisintegratingprocessisworkedout.	while
biela’s	comet	is	perhaps	the	most	striking	instance	in	which	the	head	has	broken	up,	it	is
by	no	meansthe	only	one.	the	great	comet	of	1882	cast	off	a	considerable	number	of
fragments	which	moved	away	as	independent	though	small	comets	and	other	more	recent
cometshavebeenseentodothesameanevenmorestrikingphenomenonwasthe
gradual	breaking	up	of	the	nucleus	of	the	same	comet,	1882,	iiinto	a	half	dozen	nuclei
arrangedinlinelikebeadsuponastringandpointingalongtheaxisofthetailsee
fig.	119,	which	shows	the	series	of	changes	observed	in	the	head	of	this	comet.
182.	cometsandthespectroscope.—thespectrumpresentedbycometswaslonga
puzzleandstillretainssomethingofthatcharacteralthoughmuchprogresshasbeen
made	toward	an	understanding	of	it.	in	general	it	consists	of	two	quite	distinct	parts—first,
afaintbackgroundofcontinuousspectrumduetoordinarysunlightreflectedfromthe
comet;	and,	second,	superposed	upon	this,	three	bright	bands	like	the	carbon	band	shown
at	the	middle	of	fig.	48,	only	not	so	sharply	defined.	these	bands	make	a	discontinuous
spectrum	quitesimilartothatgivenoffbycompoundsofhydrogenandcarbonandof
courseindicatethata	part	ofthecomet’slight	originatesinthe	bodyitself,	which	must
therefore	be	incandescent,	or	at	least	must	contain	some	incandescent	portions.
october	9,	1882.	november	21,	1882.	february	1,	1883.	march	3,	1883.	fig.	119.—the
head	of	the	great	comet	of	1882.—winlock.
fig.	119.—the	head	of	the	great	comet	of	1882.—winlock.
by	heating	hydrocarbonsin	ourlaboratories	untilthey	becomeincandescentsomething
like	the	comet	spectrum	may	be	artificially	produced,	butthe	best	approximation	to	itis
obtained	by	passing	a	disruptive	electrical	discharge	through	a	tube	in	which	fragments	of
meteors	have	been	placed.	a	flash	of	lightning	is	a	disruptive	electrical	discharge	upon	a
grandscale.	now,	meteorsandelectricphenomenahavebeenindependentlybroughtto
our	notice	in	connection	with	comets,	and	with	this	suggestion	it	is	easy	to	frame	a	general
ideaofthephysicalconditionoftheseobjects—forexampleacloudofmeteorsof
differentsizessolooselyclusteredthattheaveragedensityoftheswarmisverylow
indeedtheseveralparticlesin	motionrelativetoeach	otheras	wellastothesunand
disturbedinthat	motionbythesun’stidalactioneachparticlecarriesitsownelectric
charge,	which	may	be	of	higher	or	lower	tension	than	that	of	its	neighbor,	and	is	ready	to
leapacrosstheinterveninggapwhenevertwoparticlesapproacheachothertothese
conditions	add	the	inductive	effect	of	the	sun’s	electric	charge,	which	tends	to	produce	a
particular	and	artificial	distribution	of	electricity	among	the	comet’s	particles,	and	we	may
expect	to	find	an	endless	succession	of	sparks,	tiny	lightning	flashes,	springing	from	one
particle	to	another,	most	frequent	and	most	vivid	when	the	comet	is	near	the	sun,	but	never
strong	enough	to	be	separately	visible.	their	numberis,	however,	great	enough	to	make
the	comet	in	part	self-luminous	with	three	kinds	of	light—i.	e.,	the	three	bright	bands	of	its
spectrum,	whose	wavelengths	show	inthe	cometthe	same	elements	and	compounds	of
the	elements—carbon,	hydrogen,	and	oxygen—which	chemical	analysis	finds	in	the	fallen
meteor.	it	is	not	to	be	supposed	that	these	are	the	only	chemical	elements	in	the	comet,	as
they	certainly	are	not	the	only	ones	in	the	meteor.	they	are	the	easy	ones	to	detect	under
ordinary	circumstances,	but	in	special	cases,	like	that	of	the	great	comet	of	1882,	whose
near	approach	tothe	sun	rendered	its	whole	substance	incandescentthe	spectrum	glows
with	additional	bright	lines	of	sodium,	iron,	etc.
183.	collisions.—a	questionsometimesasked,	what	wouldbetheeffectofacollision
betweentheearthand	acometfindsitsanswerintheresultsreachedinthe	preceding
sections.	there	would	be	a	star	shower,	more	or	less	brilliant	according	to	the	number	and
size	of	the	pieces	which	made	up	the	comet’s	head.	if	these	were	like	the	remains	of	the
biela	comet,	the	shower	might	even	be	a	very	tame	one;	but	a	collision	with	a	great	comet
would	certainly	produce	a	brilliant	meteoric	displayifits	head	camein	contact	withthe
earth.	if	the	comet	were	built	of	small	pieces	whose	individual	weights	did	not	exceed	a
few	ounces	or	poundsthe	earth’s	atmosphere	would	prove	a	perfect	shield	againsttheir
attacksreducingthepiecestoharmlessdustbeforetheycouldreachthegroundand
leaving	the	earth	uninjured	by	the	encounter,	although	the	comet	might	suffer	sadly	from
it.	but	big	stones	in	the	comet,	meteors	too	massive	to	be	consumed	in	their	flight	through
the	air,	might	work	a	very	different	effect,	and	by	their	bombardment	play	sad	havoc	with
parts	of	the	earth’s	surface,	although	any	such	result	as	the	wrecking	of	the	earth,	or	the
destruction	of	all	life	upon	it,	does	not	seem	probable.	the	40	meteors	of	§	169	may	stand
for	a	collision	with	a	small	comet.	consult	the	bible	(joshua	x,	11)	for	an	example	of	what
might	happen	with	a	larger	one.

chapter	xiii
the	fixed	stars
184.	theconstellations.—intheearlierchaptersthestudenthaslearnedtodistinguish
between	wandering	stars	(planets)	and	those	fixed	luminaries	which	remain	year	after	year
inthesameconstellationshiningforthemostpartwithunvaryingbrilliancyand
presenting	the	most	perfect	known	image	of	immutability.	homer	and	job	and	prehistoric
man	saw	orion	and	the	pleiades	much	as	we	see	them	to-day,	although	the	precession,	by
changing	their	relation	to	the	pole	of	the	heavens,	has	altered	their	risings	and	settings,	and
it	may	be	that	their	luster	has	changed	in	some	degree	as	they	grew	old	with	the	passing
centuries.
fig.	120.—illustrating	the	division	of	the	sky	into	constellations.
fig.	120.—illustrating	the	division	of	the	sky	into	constellations.
the	divisionoftheskyintoconstellationsdatesbacktothe	mostprimitivetimeslong
before	the	christian	era,	and	the	crooked	and	irregular	boundaries	of	these	constellations,
shown	by	the	dotted	lines	in	fig.	120,	such	as	no	modern	astronomer	would	devise,	are	an
inheritancefromantiquityconfoundedandmadeworseinitsdescenttoourdaythe
boundariesassignedtoconstellationsnearthesouthpolearemuchmoresmoothand
regular,	since	this	part	of	the	sky,	invisible	to	the	peoples	from	whom	we	inherit,	was	not
studiedandmappeduntilmoremoderntimestheoldtraditionsassociatedwitheach
constellation	afigure,	often	drawn	from	classical	mythology,	which	was	supposedto	be
suggested	by	the	grouping	of	the	stars:	thus	ursa	major	is	a	great	bear,	stalking	across	the
sky,	with	the	handle	of	the	dipper	for	his	tail;	leo	is	a	lion;	cassiopeia,	a	lady	in	a	chair;
andromeda,	a	maiden	chained	to	a	rock,	etc.;	but	for	the	most	part	the	resemblances	are
far-fetched	and	quite	too	fanciful	to	be	followed	by	the	ordinary	eye.
185.	the	number	of	stars.—“as	numerous	as	the	stars	of	heaven”	is	a	familiar	figure	of
speech	for	expressing	the	idea	of	countless	number,	but	as	applied	to	the	visible	stars	of
the	sky	the	words	convey	quite	a	wrong	impression,	for,	under	ordinary	circumstances,	in
a	clear	sky	every	star	to	be	seen	may	be	counted	in	the	course	of	a	few	hours,	since	they
do	not	exceed	3,000	orthe	exact	number	depending	upon	atmospheric	conditions
and	the	keenness	of	the	individual	eye.	test	your	own	vision	by	counting	the	stars	of	the
pleiadessixareeasilyseenand	you	may	possiblyfindas	manyastenortwelvebut
however	many	are	seen,	there	will	be	a	vague	impression	of	more	just	beyond	the	limit	of
visibility,	and	doubtless	this	impression	is	partly	responsible	for	the	popular	exaggeration
of	the	number	of	the	stars.	in	fact,	much	more	than	half	of	what	we	call	starlight	comes
from	stars	which	are	separately	too	small	to	be	seen,	but	whose	number	is	so	great	as	to
more	than	make	up	for	their	individual	faintness.
the	milky	way	is	just	such	a	cloud	of	faint	stars,	and	the	student	who	can	obtain	access	to
a	small	telescope,	or	even	an	opera	glass,	should	not	fail	to	turn	it	toward	the	milky	way
and	see	for	himself	how	that	vague	stream	of	light	breaks	up	into	shining	points,	each	an
independent	star.	these	faint	stars,	which	are	found	in	every	part	of	the	sky	as	well	as	in
the	milky	wayare	usuallycalledtelescopicinrecognition	ofthefactthatthey	can	be
seen	only	in	the	telescope,	while	the	other	brighter	ones	are	known	as	lucid	stars.
186.	magnitudes.—the	telescopic	stars	show	among	themselves	an	even	greater	range	of
brightnessthandothelucidonesandthesystemof	magnitudeshasaccordingly
beenextendedtoincludethemthefainteststarvisibleinthegreatesttelescopeofthe
presenttime	being	ofthe	sixteenth	or	seventeenth	magnitude,	while,	as	we	have	already
learned,	stars	on	the	dividing	line	between	the	telescopic	and	the	lucid	ones	are	of	the	sixth
magnitudetocomparetheamountoflightreceivedfromthestars	withthatfromthe
planets,	and	particularly	from	the	sun	and	moonit	has	been	found	necessary	to	prolong
the	scale	of	magnitudes	backward	into	the	negative	numbers,	and	we	speak	of	the	sun	as
havingastellarmagnituderepresentedbythenumberthefullmoon’sstellar
magnitude	is	-12,	and	the	planets	range	from	-3	(venus)	to	+8	(neptune).	even	a	very	few
ofthestarsaresobrightthatnegative	magnitudes	mustbeusedtorepresenttheirtrue
relation	to	the	fainter	ones.	sirius,	for	example,	the	brightest	of	the	fixed	stars,	is	of	the	-1
magnitude,	and	such	stars	as	arcturus	and	vega	are	of	the	0	magnitude.
the	relation	of	these	magnitudes	to	each	other	has	been	so	chosen	that	a	star	of	any	one
magnitude	is	very	approximately	2.5	times	as	bright	as	one	of	the	next	fainter	magnitude,
andthisratiofurnishes	aconvenient	method	ofcomparingthe	amount	oflightreceived
from	different	stars.	thus	the	brightness	of	venus	is	2.5	×	2.5	times	that	of	sirius.	the	full
moon	is	(2.5)9	times	as	bright	as	venus,	etc.;	only	it	should	be	observed	that	the	number
2.5	is	not	exactly	the	value	of	the	light	ratio	between	two	consecutive	magnitudes.	strictly
thisratioisthesothattobeentirelyaccuratewemustsaythata
differenceoffivemagnitudesgivesahundredfolddifferenceofbrightnessin
mathematicalsymbolsif	brepresentstheratioofbrightness(quantityoflightoftwo
stars	whose	magnitudes	are	m	and	n,	then
b	=	(100)(m-n)/5
how	much	brighter	is	an	ordinary	first-magnitude	star,	such	as	aldebaran	or	spica,	than	a
starjustvisibletothenakedeyehowmanyofthefainteststarsvisibleinagreat
telescope	would	be	required	to	make	one	star	just	visible	to	the	unaided	eye?	how	many
full	moons	must	be	putin	the	sky	in	order	to	give	an	illumination	as	bright	as	daylight?
how	large	a	part	of	the	visible	hemisphere	would	they	occupyclassificationbymagnitudes.—thebrightnessofallthelucidstarshasbeen
carefully	measured	with	an	instrument	(photometer)	designed	for	that	special	purpose,	and
the	following	table	shows,	according	to	the	harvard	photometry,	the	number	of	stars	in	the
whole	sky,	from	pole	to	pole,	which	are	brighter	than	the	several	magnitudes	named	in	the
table:
the	numberof	starsbrighterthanmagnitudeis4,326
it	mustnotbeinferredfromthistablethatthereareinthe	wholeskyonlystars
visible	to	the	naked	eye.	the	actual	number	is	probably	50	or	60	per	cent	greater	than	this,
and	the	normal	human	eye	sees	stars	as	faint	as	the	magnitude	6.4	or	6.5,	the	discordance
between	this	number	and	the	previous	statementthatthe	sixth	magnitude	isthelimit	of
the	naked-eye	vision,	having	been	introduced	in	the	attempt	to	make	precise	and	accurate
a	classification	into	magnitudes	which	was	at	first	only	rough	and	approximate.	this	same
strivingafteraccuracyleadstotheintroductionoffractionalnumberstorepresent
gradations	of	brightness	intermediate	between	whole	magnitudes.	thus	of	the	2,843	stars
included	between	the	fifth	and	sixth	magnitudes	a	certain	proportion	are	said	to	be	of	themagnitudemagnitudeandsoontothemagnitudeevenhundredthsofa
magnitude	being	sometimes	employed.
we	havefoundthe	number	ofstarsincluded	betweenthefifthandsixth	magnitudes	by
subtracting	from	the	last	number	of	the	preceding	table	the	number	immediately	preceding
it,	and	similarly	we	may	find	the	number	included	between	each	other	pair	of	consecutive
magnitudes,	as	follows:
magnitude6
number	of	stars2,843
4	×	3m2,916
in	the	last	line	each	number	after	the	first	is	found	by	multiplying	the	preceding	one	by	3,
and	the	approximate	agreement	of	each	such	number	with	that	printed	above	it	shows	that
onthe	whole,	asfar	asthetable	goesthefainterstars	are	approximatelythreetimes	as
numerous	as	those	a	magnitude	brighter.
the	magnitudes	of	the	telescopic	stars	have	not	yet	been	measured	completely,	and	their
exact	numberis	unknown;	butif	we	apply	our	principle	of	athreefoldincrease	for	each
successive	magnitude,	we	shallfindforthefainterstars—those	ofthetenth	andtwelfth
magnitudes—prodigiousnumberswhichrunupintothemillionsandeventheseare
probably	too	small,	since	down	to	the	ninth	or	tenth	magnitude	it	is	certain	that	the	number
ofthetelescopicstarsincreasesfrom	magnitudeto	magnitudein	morethanathreefold
ratio.	this	is	balanced	in	some	degree	by	the	less	rapid	increase	which	is	known	to	exist	in
magnitudes	still	fainter;	and	applying	our	formula	without	regard	to	these	variations	in	the
rate	ofincrease,	we	obtain	as	a	rude	approximation	to	the	total	number	of	stars	down	to
the	fifteenth	magnitude,	86,000,000.	the	herschelsfather	and	son,	actually	countedthe
numberofstarsvisibleinnearlysampleregionsoftheskyandinferringthe
character	of	the	whole	sky	from	these	samples,	we	find	it	to	contain	58,500,000	stars;	but
the	magnitude	of	the	faintest	star	visible	in	their	telescope,	and	included	in	their	count,	is
rather	uncertain.
how	many	first-magnitude	stars	would	be	neededto	give	as	much	light	as	dothe	2,843
stars	of	magnitudeto	6.0?	how	manytenth-magnitude	stars	arerequiredto	givethe
same	amount	of	light?
to	the	modern	man	it	seems	natural	to	ascribe	the	different	brilliancies	of	the	stars	to	their
different	distances	from	us;	but	such	was	notthe	case	2,000	years	ago,	when	each	fixed
star	was	commonly	thought	to	be	fastened	to	a	“crystal	sphere,”	which	carried	them	with
it,	all	at	the	same	distance	from	us,	as	it	turned	about	the	earth.	in	breaking	away	from	this
erroneousideaandlearningtothinkoftheskyitselfasonlyanatmosphericillusion
through	which	we	look	to	stars	at	very	different	distances	beyond,	it	was	easy	to	fall	into
the	opposite	error	and	to	think	of	the	stars	as	being	much	alike	one	with	another,	and,	like
pebbles	on	the	beach,	scattered	throughout	space	with	some	rough	degree	of	uniformity,	so
that	in	every	direction	there	should	be	found	in	equal	measure	stars	near	at	hand	and	stars
far	off,	each	shining	with	a	luster	proportioned	to	its	remoteness.
188.	distances	of	the	stars.—now,	in	order	to	separate	the	true	from	the	false	in	this	last
mode	of	thinking	about	the	stars,	we	need	some	knowledge	of	their	real	distances	from	the
earthandinseekingitweencounterwhatisperhapsthemostdelicateanddifficult
probleminthewholerangeofobservationalastronomyasshowninfigthe
principlesinvolvedindeterminingthesedistancesarenotfundamentallydifferentfrom
those	employed	in	determining	the	moon’s	distance	from	the	earth.	thus,	the	ellipse	at	the
left	of	the	figure	represents	the	earth’s	orbit	and	the	position	of	the	earth	at	different	times
oftheyearthedirectionofthestar	aattheseseveraltimesisshownbylinesdrawn
through	aandprolongedtothebackgroundapparentlyfurnishedbythesky.	asimilar
constructionismadeforthestarbanditisreadilyseenthatowingtothechanging
position	of	the	observer	as	he	moves	around	the	earth’s	orbit,	both	a	and	b	will	appear	to
move	upon	the	background	in	orbits	shaped	like	that	of	the	earth	as	seen	from	the	star,	but
having	their	size	dependent	upon	the	star’s	distance,	the	apparent	orbit	of	a	beinglarger
than	that	of	b,	because	a	is	nearer	the	earth.	by	measuring	the	angular	distance	between	a
and	b	at	opposite	seasons	of	the	year	(e.	gthe	angles	a—jan.—b,	and	a—july—bthe
astronomer	determines	from	the	change	in	this	angle	how	much	larger	is	the	one	path	than
theotherandthusconcludeshowmuchnearerisathanbstrictlythedifference
betweenthejanuaryandjulyanglesisequaltothedifferencebetweentheangles
subtended	at	a	and	b	by	the	diameter	of	the	earth’s	orbit,	and	if	b	were	so	far	away	that
theanglejan.—b—julywerenothingatallweshouldgetimmediatelyfromthe
observationstheanglejan.—a—julywhichwouldsufficetodeterminethestars’
distance.	supposing	the	diameter	of	the	earth’s	orbit	and	the	angle	at	a	to	be	known,	can
you	make	a	graphical	construction	that	will	determine	the	distance	of	a	from	the	earth?
fig.	121.—determining	a	star’s	parallax.
fig.	121.—determining	a	star’s	parallax.
the	angle	subtended	at	a	by	the	radius	of	the	earth’s	orbit—i.	e.,	1/2	(jan.—a—july)—is
called	the	star’s	parallax,	and	this	is	commonly	used	by	astronomers	as	a	measure	of	the
star’s	distance	instead	of	expressing	it	in	linear	units	such	as	miles	or	radii	of	the	earth’s
orbitthedistanceofastarisequaltotheradiusoftheearth’sorbitdividedbythe
parallax,	in	seconds	of	arc,	and	multiplied	by	the	number	206265.
a	weak	point	of	this	method	of	measuring	stellar	distances	is	that	it	always	gives	what	is
calledarelativeparallax—iethedifferencebetweentheparallaxesof	aand	band
while	it	is	customary	to	select	for	b	a	star	or	stars	supposed	to	be	much	farther	off	than	a,
it	may	happen,	and	sometimes	does	happen,	that	these	comparison	stars	as	they	are	called
are	as	near	or	nearer	than	a,	and	give	a	negative	parallax—i.	e.,	the	difference	between	the
angles	at	a	and	b	proves	to	be	negative,	as	it	must	whenever	the	star	b	is	nearer	than	a.
thefirstreallysuccessfuldeterminationsofstellarparallaxweremadebystruveand
bessel	alittle	priorto	1840,	and	sincethattimethe	distances	of	perhaps	100	stars	have
been	measured	with	some	degree	of	reliability,	although	the	parallaxes	themselves	are	so
small—never	as	great	as	1”—that	it	is	extremely	difficult	to	avoid	falling	into	error,	since
even	for	the	nearest	star	the	problem	of	its	distance	is	equivalent	to	finding	the	distance	of
an	object	morethan	5	milesaway	bylookingatitfirst	with	oneeyeandthen	withthe
other.	too	short	a	base	line.
189.	the	sun	and	his	neighbors.—the	distances	of	the	sun’s	nearer	neighbors	among	the
stars	are	shown	in	fig.	122,	where	the	two	circles	having	the	sun	at	their	center	represent
distancesfromitequalrespectivelytoandtimesthedistance
between	earth	and	sun.	in	the	figure	the	direction	of	each	star	from	the	sun	corresponds	to
itsrightascensionasshownbytheromannumeralsabouttheoutercirclethetrue
direction	of	the	star	from	the	sun	can	not,	of	course,	be	shown	upon	the	flat	surface	of	the
paper,	but	it	may	be	found	by	elevating	or	depressing	the	star	from	the	surface	of	the	paper
throughanangleasseenfromthesunequaltoitsdeclinationasshowninthefifth
column	of	the	following	table,
the	sun’s	nearest	neighbors
nostarmagnituder.	adecparallaxdistance.
1α	centauri14.5h0.27
2ll61	cygni0.51
4η	herculis0.51
5sirius0.58
7procyonγ	draconis0.68
9gr0.71
10lac0.74
11σ	draconis0.82
12a.	o0.82
13η	cassiopei0.82
14altairϵ	indi1.03
16gr10	ursæ	majoris1.03
18castor1.03
19llο2	eridani1.08
21a.	o1.08
22ll1.14
23b.	d1.14
24gr1.21
25β	cassiopei70	ophiuchi1.38
28gr1.38
29μ	cassiopeiϑ	eridaniι	ursæ	majoris1.58
32β	hydri1.58
33fomalhaut1.58
34brϑ	cygni1.71
36β	com1.87
37ψ5	aurigπ	herculis1.87
39aldebaran2.06
40capella2.06
41b.	d2.06
42grγ	cygni2.06
44regulus2.06
45vega2.06
inwhichthenumbersinthefirstcolumnarethoseplacedadjacenttothestarsinthe
diagram	to	identify	them.
fig.	122.—stellar	neighbors	of	the	sun.
fig.	122.—stellar	neighbors	of	the	sun.
190.	light	years.—the	radius	of	the	inner	circle	in	fig.	122,	1,000,000	times	the	earth’s
distance	from	the	sun,	is	a	convenient	unit	in	which	to	express	the	stellar	distances,	and	in
the	preceding	tablethe	distances	ofthe	stars	from	the	sun	are	expressed	in	terms	ofthis
unittoexpresstheminmilesthenumbersinthetablemustbemultipliedby
93,000,000,000,000.	the	nearest	star,	α	centauri,	is	25,000,000,000,000	miles	away.	but
there	is	another	unit	in	more	common	use—i.	e.,	the	distance	traveled	over	by	light	in	the
period	of	one	year.	we	have	already	found	(§	141)	that	it	requires	light	8m.	18s.	to	come
from	the	sun	to	the	earth,	and	it	is	a	simple	matter	to	find	from	this	datum	that	in	a	year
light	moves	over	a	space	equal	to	63,368	radii	of	the	earth’s	orbit.	this	distance	is	called	a
light	year,	and	the	distance	of	the	same	star,	α	centauri,	expressed	in	terms	of	this	unit,	is
4.26	years—i.	e.,	it	takes	light	that	long	to	come	from	the	star	to	the	earth.
in	figthe	stellar	magnitudes	ofthe	stars	areindicated	bythe	size	ofthe	dots—the
bigger	the	dot	the	brighter	the	star—and	a	mere	inspection	of	the	figure	will	serve	to	show
that	within	a	radius	of	30	light	years	from	the	sun	bright	stars	and	faint	ones	are	mixed	up
together,	and	that,	so	far	as	distance	is	concerned,	the	sun	is	only	a	member	of	this	swarm
of	stars,	whose	distances	apart,	eachfromits	nearest	neighbor,	are	ofthe	same	order	of
magnitude	as	those	which	separate	the	sun	from	the	three	or	four	stars	nearest	it.
figisnottobesupposedcompletedoubtlessotherstarswillbefoundwhose
distance	from	the	sun	is	less	than	2,000,000	radii	of	the	earth’s	orbit,	but	it	is	not	probable
that	they	will	ever	suffice	to	more	than	double	or	perhaps	treble	the	number	here	shown.
the	vast	majority	of	the	stars	lie	far	beyond	the	limits	of	the	figure.
191.	proper	motions.—itisevidentthatthesestarsaretoofarapartfortheirmutual
attractionstohave	muchinfluenceoneuponanotherandthatwehavehereacasein
which,	accordingto	§	34,	each	starisfreeto	keep	unchangedits	state	ofrest	or	motion
withunvaryingvelocityalongastraightline.	theirverynamefixed	starsimpliesthat
they	are	atrest,	and	so	astronomerslong	believed.	hipparchus(125	b.	c.)	and	ptolemy
(130	a.	d.)	observed	and	recorded	many	allineations	among	the	stars,	in	order	to	give	to
future	generations	a	means	of	settling	this	very	question	of	a	possible	motion	of	the	stars
and	a	resulting	change	in	their	relative	positions	upon	the	sky.	for	example,	they	found	at
the	beginning	ofthe	christian	erathatthefourstars,	capella,	ϑ	persei,	α	and	β	arietis,
stood	in	a	straight	line—i.	e.,	upon	a	great	circle	of	the	sky.	verify	this	by	direct	reference
to	the	sky,	and	see	how	nearly	these	stars	have	keptthe	same	position	for	nearly	twenty
centuries.	three	of	them	may	be	identified	from	the	star	maps,	and	the	fourth,	ϑ	persei,	is
a	third-magnitude	star	between	capella	and	the	other	two.
other	allineations	given	by	ptolemy	are:	spica,	arcturus	and	β	bootis;	spica,	δ	corvi	and
γ	corvi;	α	libræ,	arcturus	and	ζ	ursæ	majoris.	arcturus	does	not	nowfit	very	wellto
these	alignments,	and	nearly	two	centuries	ago	it,	together	with	aldebaran	and	sirius,	was
on	other	grounds	suspected	to	have	changed	its	place	in	the	sky	since	the	days	of	ptolemy.
thisdiscoverylongsincefullyconfirmedgaveagreatimpetustoobservingwithall
possible	accuracy	the	right	ascensions	and	declinations	of	the	stars,	with	a	view	to	finding
other	cases	of	what	was	called	proper	motion—i.	ea	motion	peculiartotheindividual
star	as	contrasted	with	the	change	of	right	ascension	and	declination	produced	for	all	stars
by	the	precession.
sincethemiddleoftheeighteenthcenturytherehavebeenmademanythousandsof
observations	of	this	kind,	whose	results	have	gone	into	star	charts	and	star	catalogues,	and
which	are	now	being	supplemented	by	a	photographic	survey	of	the	sky	that	is	intended	to
record	permanently	upon	photographic	plates	the	position	and	magnitude	of	every	star	in
the	heavens	down	to	the	fourteenth	magnitude,	with	a	view	to	ultimately	determining	all
their	proper	motions.
thecompleteachievementofthisresultisofcourseathingoftheremotefuturebut
sufficientprogressindeterminingthese	motions	hasbeen	made	duringthe	pastcentury
and	a	half	to	show	that	nearly	every	lucid	star	possesses	some	proper	motion,	although	in
most	cases	it	is	very	small,	there	being	less	than	100	known	stars	in	which	it	amounts	to	so
much	as	1”	per	annum—i.	e.,	a	rate	of	motion	across	the	sky	which	would	require	nearly
thewholechristianeratoalterastar’sdirectionfromusbysomuchasthemoon’s
angular	diameter.	the	most	rapid	known	proper	motion	is	that	of	a	telescopic	star	midway
between	the	equator	and	the	south	pole,	which	changes	its	position	at	the	rate	of	nearly	9”
perannumandthenextgreatestisthatofanothertelescopicstarinthenorthernsky,
no.	28	of	fig.	122.	it	is	not	until	we	reach	the	tenth	place	in	a	list	of	large	proper	motions
that	we	find	a	bright	lucid	star,	no.	1	of	fig.	122.	it	is	a	significant	fact	that	for	the	most
part	the	stars	with	large	proper	motions	are	precisely	the	ones	shown	in	fig.	122,	which	is
designedto	show	stars	nearthe	earth.	this	connection	between	nearness	and	rapidity	of
proper	motionsisindeed	whatweshouldexpecttofindsinceagivenamountofreal
motionofthestaralongitsorbitwillproducealargerangulardisplacementproper
motion,	the	nearer	the	star	is	to	the	earth,	and	this	fact	has	guided	astronomers	in	selecting
thestarstobeobservedforparallaxtheproper	motionbeingdeterminedfirstandthe
parallax	afterward.
192.	the	pathsofthestars.—wehavealreadyseenreasonforthinkingthattheorbit
along	which	a	star	moves	is	practically	a	straight	line,	and	from	a	study	of	proper	motions,
particularly	their	directions	across	the	sky,	it	appears	that	these	orbits	point	in	all	possible
ways—northsoutheastand	west—sothatsome	ofthem	are	doubtless	directed	nearly
toward	or	from	the	sun;	others	are	square	to	the	line	joining	sun	and	star;	while	the	vast
majority	occupy	some	position	intermediate	between	these	two.	now,	our	relation	to	these
real	motions	of	the	stars	is	well	illustrated	in	fig.	112,	where	the	observer	finds	in	some	of
theshootingstarsatremendousproper	motionacrosstheskybutseesnothingoftheir
rapid	approach	to	him,	while	others	appear	to	stand	motionless,	although,	in	fact,	they	are
moving	quite	as	rapidly	as	are	their	fellows.	the	fixed	star	resembles	the	shooting	star	in
thisrespectthatits	proper	motionis	onlythat	part	ofitsreal	motion	whichlies	atright
anglestothelineofsightandthisneedstobesupplementedbythatotherpartofthe
motion	whichlies	paralleltotheline	of	sightin	orderto	give	us	any	knowledge	ofthe
star’s	real	orbit.
fig.	123.—motion	of	polaris	in	the	line	of	sight	as	determined	by	the	spectroscope.	frost.
fig.	123.—motion	of	polaris	in	the	line	of	sight	as	determined	by	the	spectroscope.
frost.
193.	motioninthelineofsight.—itisonlywithinthelastyearsthatanything
whateverhasbeenaccomplishedindeterminingthesestellarmotionsofapproachor
recessionbut	withinthattime	muchprogresshasbeen	madebyapplyingthe	doppler
principle	(§	89)	to	the	study	of	stellar	spectra,	and	atthe	present	time	nearly	every	great
telescope	in	the	world	is	engaged	upon	work	of	this	kind.	the	shifting	of	the	lines	of	the
spectrum	toward	the	violet	or	toward	the	red	end	of	the	spectrum	indicates	with	certainty
theapproachorrecessionofthestarbutthisshiftingwhichmustbedeterminedby
comparingthestar’sspectrum	withthatofsomeartificiallightshowingcorresponding
lines,	is	so	small	in	amount	that	its	accurate	measurement	is	a	matter	of	extreme	difficulty,
as	may	be	seen	from	fig.	123.	this	cut	shows	along	its	central	line	a	part	of	the	spectrum
of	polaris,	between	wave	lengths	4,450	and	4,600	tenth	meters,	while	above	and	below	are
the	corresponding	parts	ofthespectrum	of	an	electricspark	whoselight	passedthrough
thesamespectroscopeand	wasphotographeduponthesameplate	withthatofpolaris.
this	comparison	spectrum	is,	as	it	should	be,	a	discontinuous	or	bright-line	one,	while	the
spectrum	of	the	star	is	a	continuous	one,	broken	only	by	dark	gaps	or	lines,	many	of	which
have	no	corresponding	lines	in	the	comparison	spectrum.	but	a	certain	number	of	lines	in
the	two	spectra	do	correspond,	save	that	the	dark	line	is	always	pushed	a	very	little	toward
the	direction	of	shorter	wave	lengths,	showing	that	this	star	is	approaching	the	earth.	this
spectrum	was	photographedforthe	express	purpose	of	determiningthestar’s	motionin
the	line	of	sight,	and	with	it	there	should	be	compared	figs.	124	and	125,	which	show	in
the	upper	part	of	each	a	photograph	obtained	without	comparison	spectra	by	allowing	the
star’slightto	passthrough	some	prisms	placedjustinfront	ofthetelescope.	thelower
section	of	each	figure	shows	an	enlargement	ofthe	original	photograph,	bringing	outits
details	in	a	way	not	visible	to	the	unaided	eye.	in	the	enlarged	spectrum	of	β	aurigæ	a	rate
of	motion	equal	to	that	of	the	earth	in	its	orbit	would	be	represented	by	a	shifting	of	0.03
of	a	millimeter	in	the	position	of	the	broad,	hazy	lines.
fig.	124.—spectrum	of	β	aurigæ.—pickering.
fig.	124.—spectrum	of	β	aurigæ.—pickering.
despite	the	difficulty	of	dealing	with	such	small	quantities	as	the	above,	very	satisfactory
results	are	now	obtained,	and	from	them	it	is	known	that	the	velocities	of	stars	in	the	line
of	sight	are	of	the	same	order	of	magnitude	as	the	velocities	of	the	planets	in	their	orbits,
ranging	all	the	way	from	0	to	60	miles	per	second—more	than	200,000	miles	per	hour—
whichlattervelocityaccordingtocampbellistherateatwhichcassiopeiis
approaching	the	sun.
the	student	should	not	fail	to	note	one	important	difference	between	proper	motions	and
the	motions	determined	spectroscopically:	the	latter	are	given	directly	in	miles	per	second,
or	per	hour,	while	the	former	are	expressed	in	angular	measure,	seconds	of	arc,	and	there
can	be	no	direct	comparison	between	the	two	until	by	means	of	the	known	distances	of	the
stars	their	proper	motions	are	converted	from	angular	into	linear	measure.	we	are	brought
thus	to	the	very	heart	of	the	matter;	parallax,	proper	motion,	and	motion	in	the	line	of	sight
areintimatelyrelatedquantitiesallofwhichareessentialtoaknowledgeofthereal
motions	of	the	stars.
fig.	125.—spectrum	of	pollux.—pickering.
fig.	125.—spectrum	of	pollux.—pickering.
194.	star	drift.—an	illustration	of	how	they	may	be	made	to	work	together	is	furnished
bysomeofthestars—which	makeupthe	great	dipperandζ	ursæ	majoris,
whose	proper	motions	have	long	been	known	to	point	in	nearly	the	same	direction	across
the	sky	and	to	be	nearly	equal	in	amount.	more	recently	it	has	been	found	that	these	stars
areallmovingtowardthesunwithapproximatelythesamevelocitymilesper
secondoneotherstarofthedipperursmajorissharesinthecommonproper
motionbutitsvelocityinthelineofsighthasnotyetbeendeterminedwiththe
spectroscopethesesimilar	motions	makeitprobablethatthestarsarereallytraveling
together	through	space	along	parallel	lines;	and	on	the	supposition	that	such	is	the	case	it
isquite	possibleto	write	outasetofequations	whichshallinvolvetheirknown	proper
motions	and	motionsintheline	ofsighttogether	withtheir	unknown	distances	andthe
unknowndirectionandvelocityoftheirrealmotionalongtheirorbitssolvingthese
equations	for	the	values	of	the	unknown	quantities,	it	is	found	that	the	five	stars	probably
liein	a	plane	whichisturned	nearly	edgewisetoward	us,	andthatinthis	planethey	are
moving	about	twice	as	fast	as	the	earth	moves	around	the	sun,	and	are	at	a	distance	from
us	represented	by	a	parallax	of	less	than	0.02”—i.	e.,	six	times	as	great	as	the	outermost
circlein	fig.	122.	a	most	extraordinary	system	ofstars	which,	although	separatedfrom
eachotherbydistancesasgreatasthewholebreadthoffigyetmovealongin
parallelpaths	whichitisdifficulttoregardastheresultofchanceandfor	whichitis
equally	difficult	to	frame	an	explanation.
fig.	126.—the	great	dipper,	past,	present,	and	future.	fig.	126.—the	great	dipper,
past,	present,	and	future.
the	stars	α	and	η	of	the	great	dipper	do	not	share	in	this	motion,	and	must	ultimately	part
company	with	the	other	five,	to	the	complete	destruction	of	the	dipper’s	shape.	fig.	126
illustrates	this	change	of	shape,	the	upper	part	of	the	figure	(a)	showing	these	seven	stars
as	they	were	grouped	at	a	remote	epoch	in	the	past,	while	the	lower	section	(c)	shows	their
position	for	an	equally	remote	epoch	in	the	future.	there	is	no	resemblance	to	a	dipper	in
eitheroftheseconfigurationsbutitshouldbeobservedthatineachofthemthestars
α	and	η	keep	their	relative	position	unaltered,	and	the	other	five	stars	also	keep	together,
the	entire	change	of	appearance	being	due	to	the	changing	positions	of	these	two	groups
with	respect	to	each	other.
thisphenomenonofgroupsofstarsmovingtogetheriscalledstardriftandquitea
number	of	cases	of	it	are	found	in	different	parts	of	the	sky.	the	pleiades	are	perhaps	the
most	conspicuous	one,	for	here	some	sixty	or	more	stars	are	found	traveling	together	along
similarpathsrepeatedcarefulmeasurementsoftherelativepositionsofstarsinthis
cluster	show	that	one	of	the	lucid	stars	and	four	or	five	of	the	telescopic	ones	do	not	share
in	this	motion,	and	therefore	are	not	to	be	considered	as	members	of	the	group,	but	rather
asisolatedstarswhichforatimechancetobenearlyonlinewiththepleiadesand
probably	farther	off,	since	their	proper	motions	are	smaller.
torightlyappreciatetheextremeslownesswithwhichpropermotionsalterthe
constellations,	the	student	should	bear	in	mind	that	the	changes	shown	in	passing	from	one
section	of	figtothe	nextrepresenttheeffectofthe	presentproper	motions	ofthe
stars	accumulated	for	a	period	of	200,000	years.	will	the	stars	continue	to	move	in	straight
paths	for	so	long	a	time?
195.	the	sun’s	way.—another	and	even	moreinteresting	application	of	proper	motions
and	motions	in	the	line	of	sight	is	the	determination	from	them	of	the	sun’s	orbit	among
the	stars.	the	principleinvolvedissimple	enoughifthesun	moves	withrespecttothe
stars	and	carries	the	earth	and	the	other	planets	year	after	year	into	new	regions	of	space,
our	changing	point	of	view	must	displace	in	some	measure	every	star	in	the	sky	save	those
which	happen	to	be	exactly	on	the	line	of	the	sun’s	motion,	and	even	these	will	show	its
effect	by	their	apparent	motion	of	approach	or	recession	along	the	line	of	sight.	so	far	as
theirownorbital	motionsareconcernedthereisnoreasontosupposethat	morestars
move	north	than	south,	or	that	more	go	east	than	west;	and	when	we	find	in	their	proper
motions	a	distincttendency	to	radiate	from	a	point	somewhere	nearthe	bright	star	vega
and	to	converge	toward	a	point	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	sky,	we	infer	that	this	does	not
come	from	any	general	drift	of	the	stars	in	that	direction,	but	that	it	marks	the	course	of	the
sun	among	them.	that	it	is	moving	along	a	straight	line	pointing	toward	vega,	and	that	at
least	a	part	of	the	velocities	which	the	spectroscope	shows	in	the	line	of	sight,	comes	from
the	motion	of	the	sun	and	earth.	working	along	these	lines,	kapteyn	finds	that	the	sun	is
moving	through	space	with	a	velocity	of	11	miles	per	second,	which	is	decidedly	below
the	average	rate	of	stellar	motion—19	miles	per	second.
196.	distance	of	sirian	and	solar	stars.—by	combiningthisrate	of	motion	ofthe	sun
withtheaveragepropermotionsofthestarsofdifferentmagnitudesitispossibleto
obtainsomeideaoftheaveragedistancefromusofafirst-magnitudestarorasixth-
magnitudestarwhichwhileitgivesnoinformationabouttheactualdistanceofany
particular	star,	does	show	that	on	the	whole	the	fainter	stars	are	more	remote.	but	here	a
broad	distinction	must	be	drawn.	by	far	the	larger	part	of	the	stars	belong	to	one	of	two
well-markedclassescalledrespectivelysirianandsolarstarswhicharereadily
distinguishedfromeachotherbythekindofspectrumtheyfurnishthusaurigæ
belongstothesirianclassasdoeseveryotherstarwhichhasaspectrumlikethatof
fig.	124,	while	pollux	is	a	solar	star	presenting	in	fig.	125	a	spectrum	like	that	of	the	sun,
as	do	the	other	stars	of	this	class.
two	thirds	of	the	sun’s	near	neighbors,	shown	in	fig.	122,	have	spectra	of	the	solar	type,
and	in	general	stars	of	this	class	are	nearer	to	us	than	are	the	stars	with	spectra	unlike	that
ofthesuntheaveragedistanceofasolarstarofthefirstmagnitudeisvery
approximately	represented	by	the	outer	circle	in	fig.	122,	2,000,000	times	the	distance	of
thesunfromtheearthwhilethecorrespondingdistanceforasirianstarofthefirst
magnitude	is	represented	by	the	number	4,600,000.
a	third-magnitude	star	is	on	the	average	twice	as	far	away	as	one	of	the	first	magnitude,	a
fifth-magnitude	starfourtimes	asfar	off,	etceach	additionaltwo	magnitudes	doubling
theaveragedistanceofthestarsatleastdowntotheeighthmagnitudeandpossibly
farther,	although	beyond	this	limit	we	have	no	certain	knowledge.	put	in	another	way,	the
naked	eye	sees	many	sirian	stars	which	may	have	“gone	out”	and	ceased	to	shine	centuries
agoforthelightbywhichwenowseethemleftthosestarsbeforethediscoveryof
america	by	columbus.	for	the	student	of	mathematical	tastes	we	note	that	the	results	of
kapteyn’sinvestigation	ofthe	mean	distances	(d)	ofthe	stars	of	magnitude	(m)	may	be
put	into	two	equations:
for	solar	starsd	=	23	×	2m/2
for	sirian	starsd	=	52	×	2m/2
where	the	coefficients	23	and	52	are	expressed	in	light	years.	how	long	a	time	is	required
for	light	to	come	from	an	average	solar	star	of	the	sixth	magnitude?
197.	consequences	ofstellar	distance.—theamountoflight	whichcomestousfrom
anyluminous	body	variesinversely	asthe	square	ofits	distance,	and	since	many	ofthe
starsarechangingtheir	distancefrom	us	quiterapidlyit	must	bethat	withthelapse	of
time	they	will	grow	brighter	or	fainter	by	reason	of	this	altered	distance.	but	the	distances
themselvesaresogreatthatthemostrapidknownmotioninthelineofsightwould
requiremorethanyears(probablyseveralthousandtoproduceanyperceptible
change	in	brilliancy.
the	law	in	accordance	with	which	this	change	of	brilliancy	takes	place	is	that	the	distance
must	be	increased	or	diminished	tenfold	in	order	to	produce	a	change	of	five	magnitudes
inthebrightnessoftheobjectand	we	mayapplythislawtodeterminethesun’srank
amongthestarsifit	wereremovedtothedistanceofanaveragefirstorsecondor
third-magnitudestarhowwoulditslightcomparewiththatofthestarstheaverage
distance	of	a	third-magnitude	star	of	the	solar	type	is,	as	we	have	seen	above,	4,000,000
timesthe	sun’s	distance	from	the	earth,	and	since	4,000,000	=	106.6,	we	find	that	atthis
distancethe	sun’s	stellar	magnitude	would	be	altered	by	6.6	×	5	magnitudes,	and	would
therefore	be	-26.5	+	33.0	=	6.5—i.	ethe	sunifremovedtothe	average	distance	ofthe
third-magnitude	stars	of	its	type	would	be	reduced	to	the	very	limit	of	naked-eye	visibility.
it	mustthereforeberelativelysmallandfeebleascompared	withthebrightnessofthe
average	star.	it	is	only	its	close	proximity	to	us	that	makes	the	sun	look	brighter	than	the
stars.
thefixedstars	mayhaveplanetscirclingaroundthembutanapplicationofthesame
principles	will	show	how	hopeless	is	the	prospect	of	ever	seeing	them	in	a	telescope.	if	the
sun’snearestneighborcentauriwereattendedbyaplanetlikejupiterthisplanet
would	furnish	to	us	no	more	light	than	does	a	star	of	the	twenty-second	magnitude—i.	e.,
itwouldbeabsolutelyinvisibleandwouldremaininvisibleinthemostpowerful
telescope	yet	built,	even	though	its	bulk	wereincreased	to	equalthat	ofthe	sun.	letthe
student	makethecomputationleadingtothisresultassumingthestellarmagnitudeof
jupiter	to	be	-1.7.
198.	double	stars.—intheconstellationtaurusnotfarfrom	aldebaranisthefourth-
magnitude	star	θ	tauri,	which	can	readily	be	seento	consist	oftwo	stars	closetogether.
the	star	α	capricorniis	plainly	double,	and	asharp	eye	can	detectthat	one	ofthefaint
stars	which	with	vega	makeasmallequilateraltriangleisalsoadoublestar.	lookfor
them	in	the	sky.
in	the	strict	language	of	astronomy	the	term	double	star	would	not	be	applied	to	the	first
twooftheseobjectssinceitisusuallyrestrictedtothosestars	whoseangulardistance
from	each	other	is	so	small	that	in	the	telescope	they	appear	much	as	do	the	stars	named
abovetothe	naked	eye—i.	etheir	angular	separationis	measured	by	afew	seconds	or
fractions	of	a	single	second,	instead	of	the	six	minutes	which	separate	the	component	stars
oftauriorcapricornitherearefoundinthesky	manythousandsoftheseclose
double	stars,	of	which	some	are	only	optically	double—i.	e.,	two	stars	nearly	on	line	with
the	earth	but	at	very	different	distances	from	it—while	more	of	them	are	really	what	they
seemstarsneareachotherandinmanycasesnearenoughtoinfluenceeachother’s
motionthesearecalledbinarysystemsandincasesofthiskindtheprinciplesof
celestial	mechanicssetforthinchapterivholdtrueand	we	mayexpecttofindeach
component	of	a	double	star	moving	in	a	conic	section	of	some	kind,	having	its	focus	at	the
common	center	of	gravity	of	the	two	stars.	we	are	thus	presented	with	problems	of	orbital
motionquitesimilartothosewhichoccurinthesolarsystemandcarefultelescopic
observations	are	required	year	after	year	to	fix	the	relative	positions	of	the	two	stars—i.	e.,
theirangularseparation,	whichitiscustomarytocalltheir	distanceandtheir	direction
one	from	the	other,	which	is	called	position	angle.
199.	orbits	of	double	stars.—the	sun’s	nearest	neighbor,	α	centauriissuch	a	double
star,	whose	position	angle	and	distance	have	been	measured	by	successive	generations	of
astronomersformorethanacenturyandfigshowstheresultofplottingtheir
observationseachblackdotthatliesonornearthecircumferenceofthelongellipse
standsforanobserveddirectionanddistanceofthefainterofthetwostarsfromthe
brighter	one,	which	is	represented	by	the	small	circle	at	the	intersection	of	the	lines	inside
theellipseitappearsfromthefigurethatduringthistimetheonestarhasgone
completelyaroundtheotherasaplanetgoesaroundthesunandthetrueorbitmust
therefore	be	an	ellipse	having	one	of	its	foci	at	the	center	of	gravity	of	the	two	stars.	the
other	star	moves	in	an	ellipse	of	precisely	similar	shape,	but	probably	smaller	size,	since
thedimensionsofthetwoorbitsareinverselyproportionaltothemassesofthetwo
bodiesbutitiscustomarytoneglectthismotionofthelargerstarandtogivetothe
smaller	one	an	orbit	whose	diameter	is	equal	to	the	sum	of	the	diameters	of	the	two	real
orbitsthispracticewhichhasbeenfollowedinfiggivescorrectlytherelative
positions	of	the	two	stars,	and	makes	one	orbit	do	the	work	of	two.
fig.	127.—the	orbit	of	α	centauri.—see.	fig.	127.—the	orbit	of	α	centauri.—see.
in	fig.	127	the	bright	star	does	not	fall	anywhere	near	the	focus	of	the	ellipse	marked	out
by	the	smaller	one,	and	from	this	we	infer	that	the	figure	does	not	show	the	true	shape	of
theorbit,	whichiscertainlydistortedforeshortenedbythefactthat	welookobliquely
down	uponits	planeitis	possible,	however,	by	mathematical	analysistofindjust	how
much	and	in	what	direction	that	plane	should	be	turned	in	order	to	bring	the	focus	of	the
ellipse	up	to	the	position	of	the	principal	star,	and	thus	give	the	true	shape	and	size	of	the
orbit.	see	fig.	128	for	a	case	in	which	the	true	orbit	is	turned	exactly	edgewise	toward	the
earth,	andthe	small	star,	which	really	movesin	an	ellipselikethatshowninthefigure,
appearstooscillatetoandfroalongastraightlinedrawnthroughtheprincipalstaras
shown	at	the	left	of	the	figure.
in	the	case	of	α	centauri	the	true	orbit	proves	to	have	a	major	axis	47	times,	and	a	minor
axistimesasgreatasthedistanceoftheearthfromthesuntheorbitinfactis
intermediatein	size	between	the	orbits	of	uranus	and	neptune,	and	the	periodictime	of
the	star	in	this	orbit	is	81	years,	a	little	less	than	the	period	of	uranus.
fig.	128.—apparent	orbit	and	real	orbit	of	the	double	star	42	comæ	berenicis.—see.
fig.	128.—apparent	orbit	and	real	orbit	of	the	double	star	42	comæ	berenicis.
—see.
200.	masses	of	double	stars.—if	we	apply	to	this	orbit	kepler’s	third	law	in	the	form
given	it	at	page	179,	we	shall	find—
a3	/	t2	=	(23.5)3	/	(81)2	=	k	(m	+	m),
where	m	and	mrepresentthe	masses	ofthetwostars.	we	have	alreadyseenthat	kthe
gravitationconstantisequalto1	whenthe	massesare	measuredintermsofthesun’s
mass	taken	as	unity,	and	when	t	and	a	are	expressed	in	years	and	radii	of	the	earth’s	orbit
respectivelyandwiththisvalueofkwemayreadilyfindfromtheaboveequation,
m	+	m	=	2.5—i.	e.,	the	combined	mass	of	the	two	components	of	α	centauri	is	equal	to
rather	more	than	twice	the	mass	of	the	sun.	it	is	not	every	double	star	to	which	this	process
of	weighing	can	be	applied.	the	major	axis	of	the	orbit,	a,	is	found	from	the	observations
in	angular	measure,	35”	in	this	case,	and	it	is	only	when	the	parallax	of	the	star	is	known
thatthiscanbeconvertedintotherequiredlinearunitsradiioftheearth’sorbitby
dividing	the	angular	major	axis	by	the	parallax;	47	=	35”	÷	0.75”.
ourlist	of	distances(§	189)	containsfour	doublestars	whose	periodictimes	and	major
axeshavebeenfairlywelldeterminedandwefindintheaccompanyingtablethe
information	which	they	give	about	the	masses	of	double	stars	and	the	size	of	the	orbits	in
which	they	move:
starmajor	axis.minor	axisperiodictimemass.
α	centauri81	y2
70	ophiuchi3
procyon3
sirius4
the	orbit	of	uranus,	diameter	=	38,	and	neptune,	diameter	=	60,	are	of	muchthe	same
size	as	these	double-star	orbits;	but	the	planetary	orbits	are	nearly	circular,	while	in	every
case	the	double	stars	show	a	substantial	difference	between	the	long	and	short	diameters	of
their	orbits.	this	is	a	characteristic	feature	of	most	double-star	orbits,	and	seems	to	stand
in	some	relation	to	their	periodic	times,	for,	on	the	average,	the	longer	the	time	required	by
a	star	to	make	its	orbital	revolution	the	more	eccentric	is	its	orbit	likely	to	prove.
another	element	of	the	orbits	of	double	stars,	which	stands	in	even	closer	relation	to	the
periodic	time,	is	the	major	axis;	the	smaller	the	long	diameter	of	the	orbit	the	more	rapid	is
the	motion	and	the	shorter	the	periodic	time,	so	that	astronomers	in	search	of	interesting
double-star	orbits	devote	themselves	by	preference	to	those	stars	whose	distance	apart	is
so	small	that	they	can	barely	be	distinguished	one	from	the	other	in	the	telescope.
although	the	half-dozen	stars	contained	in	the	table	all	have	orbits	of	much	the	same	size
and	with	much	the	same	periodic	time	as	those	in	which	uranus	and	neptune	move,	this	is
by	no	means	true	of	all	the	double	stars,	many	of	which	have	periods	running	up	into	the
hundredsifnotthousandsofyearswhileafewcompletetheirorbitalrevolutionsin
periods	comparable	with,	or	even	shorter	than,	that	of	jupiter.
201.	dark	stars.—procyon,	the	next	to	the	last	star	of	the	preceding	table,	calls	for	some
special	mention,	as	the	determination	of	its	mass	and	orbit	stands	upon	a	rather	different
basis	from	that	of	the	other	stars.	more	than	half	a	century	ago	it	was	discovered	that	its
propermotionwasnotstraightanduniformafterthefashionofordinarystarsbut
presented	a	series	of	loops	like	those	marked	out	by	a	bright	point	on	the	rim	of	a	swiftly
running	bicycle	wheel.	the	hub	may	move	straight	forward	with	uniform	velocity,	but	the
point	near	the	tire	goes	up	and	down,	and,	while	sharing	in	the	forward	motion	of	the	hub,
runssometimesaheadofitsometimesbehindandsuchseemedtobethemotionof
procyon	and	of	sirius	as	well.	bessel,	who	discovered	it,	did	not	hesitate	to	apply	the	laws
ofmotionandtoaffirmthatthisvisiblechangeofthestar’smotionpointedtothe
presenceofanunseencompanionwhichproduceduponthemotionsofsiriusand
procyonjustsucheffectsasthevisiblecompanionsproduceinthemotionsofdouble
stars.	a	new	kind	of	star,	darkinstead	of	bright,	was	added	tothe	astronomer’s	domain,
and	its	discoverer	boldly	suggested	the	possible	existence	of	many	more.	“that	countless
starsarevisibleisclearlynoargumentagainsttheexistenceofas	many	moreinvisible
ones.”	“there	is	no	reason	to	think	radiance	a	necessary	property	of	celestial	bodies.”	but
most	astronomers	were	incredulous,	and	it	was	not	until	1862	that,	in	the	testing	of	a	new
and	powerfultelescope	just	built,	a	dark	star	was	broughttolight	and	the	companion	of
siriusactuallyseenthevisualdiscoveryofthedarkcompanionofprocyonisofstill
more	recent	date	(november,	1896),	when	it	was	detected	with	the	great	telescope	of	the
lick	observatory.	this	discoveryis	sorecentthatthe	orbitisstill	very	uncertain,	being
based	almost	wholly	uponthe	variationsinthe	proper	motion	ofthestarand	whilethe
periodic	time	must	be	very	nearly	correct,	the	mass	of	the	stars	and	dimensions	of	the	orbit
may	require	considerable	correction.
thecompanionofsiriusisabouttenmagnitudesandthatofprocyonabouttwelve
magnitudes	fainter	than	the	star	itself.	how	much	more	light	does	the	bright	star	give	than
itsfaint	companion?	despitethetremendous	difference	of	brightnessrepresented	bythe
answertothisquestionthemassofsiriusisonlyabouttwiceasgreatasthatofits
companion,	and	for	procyon	the	ratio	does	not	exceed	five	or	six.
the	visual	discovery	of	the	companions	to	sirius	and	procyon	removes	them	from	the	list
ofdarkstarsbutothersstillremainunseenalthoughtheirexistenceisindicatedby
variable	proper	motions	or	by	variable	orbital	motion,	asinthe	case	ofζ	cancri,	where
oneofthecomponentsofatriplestar	movesaroundtheothertwoinaseriesofloops
whose	presence	indicates	a	disturbing	body	which	has	never	yet	been	seen.
202.	multiple	stars.—combinations	of	three,	four,	or	more	stars	close	to	each	other,	like
ζ	cancri,	are	called	multiple	stars,	and	whilethey	arefarfrom	being	as	common	as	are
double	stars,	there	is	a	considerable	number	of	them	in	the	sky,	100	or	more	as	against	the
morethan	10,000	double	starsthat	are	known.	thattheirrelative	motions	are	subjectto
the	law	of	gravitation	admits	of	no	serious	doubt,	but	mathematical	analysis	breaks	down
infaceofthedifficultiesherepresentedandnoastronomerhaseverbeenableto
determine	what	will	be	the	general	character	of	the	motions	in	such	a	system.
fig.	129.—illustrating	the	motion	of	a	spectroscopic	binary.
fig.	129.—illustrating	the	motion	of	a	spectroscopic	binaryspectroscopicbinaries.—intheyearprofessorpickeringoftheharvard
observatory,	announced	the	discovery	of	a	new	class	of	double	stars,	invisible	as	such	in
eventhemostpowerfultelescopeandproducingnoperturbationssuchashavebeen
considered	above,	but	showing	in	their	spectrum	that	two	or	more	bodies	must	be	present
in	the	source	of	light	which	to	the	eye	is	indistinguishable	from	a	single	star.	in	fig.	129
we	suppose	a	and	bto	be	the	two	components	of	a	double	star,	each	moving	in	its	own
orbitabouttheircommon	centerof	gravity,	c,	whose	distancefromtheearthisseveral
milliontimesgreaterthanthedistancebetweenthestarsthemselvesundersuch
circumstances	no	telescope	could	distinguish	between	the	two	stars,	which	would	appear
fused	into	one;	but	the	smaller	the	orbit	the	more	rapid	would	be	their	motion	in	it,	and	if
this	orbit	wereturned	edgewisetoward	the	earth,	asis	supposed	inthe	figure,	whenever
thestars	wereintherelative	positionthereshown,	a	would	berapidlyapproachingthe
earthbyreasonofitsorbitalmotionwhilebwouldmoveawayfromitsothatin
accordance	with	the	doppler	principle	the	lines	composing	their	respective	spectra	would
be	shifted	in	opposite	directionsthus	producing	a	doubling	of	the	lines,	each	single	line
breaking	up	into	two,	like	the	double-sodium	line	d,	only	not	spaced	so	far	apart.	when
the	stars	have	moved	a	quarter	way	round	their	orbit	to	the	points	a’,	b’,	their	velocities
are	turned	at	right	angles	to	the	line	of	sight	and	the	spectrum	returns	to	the	normal	type
withsinglelinesonlytobreakupagainwhenafteranotherquarterrevolutiontheir
velocitiesareagainparallelwiththelineofsighttheintervaloftimebetween
consecutivedoublingsofthelinesinthespectrumthusfurnisheshalfthetimeofa
revolutioninthe	orbit.	the	distance	betweenthe	components	of	a	doubleline	shows	by
means	of	the	doppler	principle	how	fast	the	stars	are	traveling,	and	this	in	connection	with
the	periodic	times	fixes	the	size	of	the	orbit,	provided	we	assume	that	it	is	turned	exactly
edgewisetothe	earth.	this	assumption	may	not	be	quitetrue,	but	eventhoughthe	orbit
should	deviate	considerably	from	this	position,	it	will	still	present	the	phenomenon	of	the
double	lines	whose	displacement	will	now	show	something	less	than	the	true	velocities	of
the	stars	in	their	orbits,	since	the	spectroscope	measures	only	that	component	of	the	whole
velocity	which	is	directed	toward	the	earth,	and	it	is	important	to	note	that	the	real	orbits
and	masses	of	these	spectroscopic	binaries,	asthey	are	called,	will	usually	be	somewhat
largerthanthoseindicated	bythe	spectroscope,	sinceitis	onlyin	exceptional	casesthat
the	orbit	will	be	turned	exactly	edgewise	to	us.
thebrightstarcapellaisanexcellentillustrationofthesespectroscopicbinariesat
intervals	of	alittlelessthan	a	monththelines	ofitsspectrum	are	alternatelysingle	and
doubletheirmaximumseparationcorrespondingtoavelocityinthelineofsight
amounting	to	37	miles	per	second.	each	component	of	a	doubled	line	appears	to	be	shifted
an	equal	amount	from	the	position	occupied	by	the	line	when	it	is	single,	thus	indicating
equal	velocities	and	equal	masses	for	the	two	component	stars	whose	periodic	time	in	their
orbit	is	104	days.	from	this	periodic	time,	together	with	the	velocity	of	the	star’s	motion,
let	the	student	show	that	the	diameter	of	the	orbit—i.	e.,	the	distance	of	the	stars	from	each
other—isapproximately53,000,000	milesandthattheircombined	massisalittleless
than	that	of	α	centauri,	provided	that	their	orbit	plane	is	turned	exactly	edgewise	toward
the	earth.
thereareatthe	presenttimespectroscopic	binaries	knownincludingamong
them	such	stars	as	polaris,	capella,	algol,	spica,	β	aurigæ,	ζ	ursæ	majoris,	etc.,	and	their
number	is	rapidly	increasing,	about	one	star	out	of	every	seven	whose	motion	in	the	line	of
sight	is	determined	proving	to	be	a	binary	or,	as	in	the	case	of	polaris,	possibly	triple.	on
account	of	smaller	distance	aparttheir	periodictimes	are	much	shorterthan	those	ofthe
ordinary	double	stars,	andrangefrom	afew	days	upto	several	months—morethantwo
years	in	the	case	of	η	pegasi,	which	has	the	longest	known	period	of	any	star	of	this	class.
spectroscopicbinariesagree	withordinarydoublestarsinhaving	massesrathergreater
than	that	of	the	sun,	but	there	is	as	yet	no	assured	case	of	a	mass	ten	times	as	great	as	that
of	the	sun.
204.	variable	stars.—attention	has	already	been	drawn	(§	23)	to	the	fact	that	some	stars
shine	with	a	changing	brightness—e.	g.,	algol,	the	most	famous	of	these	variable	stars,	at
its	maximum	of	brightness	furnishesthreetimes	as	much	light	as	when	atits	minimum,
and	other	variable	stars	show	an	even	greater	range.	the	star	ο	ceti	has	been	named	mira
(latin,	the	wonderful),	from	its	extraordinary	range	of	brightness,	more	than	six-hundred-
fold.	for	the	greater	part	of	the	time	this	star	is	invisible	to	the	naked	eye,	but	during	some
three	months	in	every	year	it	brightens	up	sufficiently	to	be	seen,	rising	quite	rapidly	to	its
maximumbrilliancywhichissometimesthatofasecond-magnitudestarbutmore
frequently	onlythird	or	evenfourth	magnitude,	and,	aftershiningfor	afew	weeks	with
nearly	maximum	brilliancy,	falling	off	to	become	invisible	for	a	time	and	then	return	to	its
maximum	brightness	after	an	interval	of	eleven	months	from	the	preceding	maximum.	in
1901	it	should	reach	its	greatest	brilliancy	about	midsummer,	and	a	month	earlier	than	this
foreachsucceedingyearfinditbymeansofthestarmapandbycomparingits
brightnessfromnighttonight	withneighboringstarsofaboutthesame	magnitudesee
how	it	changes	with	respect	to	them.
the	interval	of	time	from	maximum	to	maximum	of	brightness—331.6	days	for	mira—is
called	the	star’s	period,	and	within	its	period	a	star	regularly	variable	runs	through	all	its
changes	of	brilliancy,	much	as	the	weather	runs	through	its	cycle	of	changes	in	the	period
ofayearbutastherearewetyearsanddryoneshotyearsandcoldsoalsowith
variable	stars,	many	of	them	show	differences	more	or	less	pronounced	between	different
periods,	and	one	such	difference	has	already	been	noted	in	the	case	of	mira;	its	maximum
brilliancy	is	different	in	different	years.	so,	too,	the	length	of	the	period	fluctuates	in	many
cases,	as	does	every	other	circumstance	connected	with	it,	and	predictions	of	what	such	a
variable	star	will	do	are	notoriously	unreliable.
205.	thealgolvariables.—ontheotherhandsomevariablestarspresentanalmost
perfectregularityrepeatingtheirchangestimeaftertimewithaprecisionlikethatof
clockwork.	algol	is	one	type	of	these	regular	variables,	having	a	period	of	68.8154	hours,
duringsixseventhsof	whichtimeitshines	withunchanginglusterasastarofthe2.3
magnitudebutduringtheremaininghoursofeachperioditrunsdowntothe3.5
magnitude,	and	comes	back	again,	as	is	shown	by	a	curve	in	fig.	130.	the	horizontal	scale
here	represents	hours,	reckoned	from	the	time	of	the	star’s	minimum	brightness,	and	the
vertical	scale	shows	stellar	magnitudes.	such	a	diagram	is	called	the	star’s	light	curve,	and
we	may	read	from	it	that	at	any	time	between	5h.	and	32h.	after	the	time	of	minimum	the
star’s	magnitudeis	2.32;	at	2h.	after	a	minimum	the	magnitudeis	2.88,	etc.	whatisthe
magnitude	an	hour	and	a	half	before	the	time	of	minimum?	what	is	the	magnitude	43	days
after	a	minimum?
fig.	130.—the	light	curve	of	algol.
fig.	130.—the	light	curve	of	algol.
the	arrows	shown	in	fig.	130	are	a	feature	not	usually	found	with	light	curves,	but	in	this
case	each	one	represents	a	spectroscopic	determination	of	the	motion	of	algol	in	the	line
of	sight.	these	observations	extended	over	a	period	of	more	than	two	years,	but	they	are
plotted	in	the	figure	with	reference	to	the	number	of	hours	each	one	preceded	or	followed
a	minimum	ofthe	star’slight,	and	each	arrow	shows	not	onlythe	direction	ofthe	star’s
motionalongthelineofsightthearrowspointingdown	denotingapproachofthestar
towardtheearthbutalsoitsvelocityeachsquareoftherulingcorrespondingto10
kilometers	(6.2	miles	per	second).	the	differences	of	velocity	shown	by	adjacent	arrows
come	mainly	from	errors	of	observation	and	furnish	some	idea	of	how	consistent	among
themselves	such	observations	are,	but	there	can	be	no	doubt	that	before	minimum	the	star
is	moving	away	fromthe	earth,	and	after	minimum	is	approachingititis	evidentfrom
these	observations	that	in	algol	we	have	to	do	with	a	spectroscopic	binary,	one	of	whose
components	is	a	dark	star	which,	once	in	each	revolution,	partially	eclipses	the	bright	star
and	produces	thus	the	variations	in	its	light.	by	combining	the	spectroscopic	observations
withthe	variationsinthestar’slight,	vogelfindsthatthe	brightstar,	algolitself	has	a
diameter	somewhat	greater	than	that	of	the	sun,	butis	oflow	density,	so	thatits	mass	is
less	than	half	that	of	the	sun,	while	the	dark	star	is	a	very	little	smaller	than	the	sun	and
hasaboutaquarterofits	mass.	the	distance	betweenthetwostarsdarkand	brightis
3,200,000	miles.	fig.	129,	which	is	drawn	to	scale,	shows	the	relative	positions	and	sizes
of	these	stars	as	well	as	the	orbits	in	which	they	move.
the	merefactalreadynotedthatclosebinarysystemsexistinconsiderablenumbersis
sufficient	to	make	it	probable	that	a	certain	proportion	of	these	stars	would	have	their	orbit
planesturnedsonearlyedgewisetowardtheearthastoproduceeclipsesand
corresponding	to	this	probability	there	are	already	known	no	less	than	15	stars	of	the	algol
type	of	eclipse	variables,	and	only	a	beginning	has	been	made	in	the	search	for	them.
fig.	131.—the	light	curve	of	β	lyræ.
fig.	131.—the	light	curve	of	β	lyræ.
206.	variables	of	the	β	lyræ	type.—in	addition	to	these	there	is	a	certain	further	number
ofbinaryvariablesinwhichbothcomponentsarebrightandwherethevariationof
brightnessfollowsaverydifferentcourse.	capella	wouldbesuchavariableifitsorbit
planeweredirectedexactlytowardtheearthandthefactthatitslightisnotvariable
shows	conclusively	that	such	is	not	the	position	of	the	orbit.	fig.	131	represents	the	light
curve	of	one	of	the	best-known	variable	systems	of	this	second	type,	that	of	β	lyræ,	whose
period	is	12	days	21.8	hours,	and	the	student	should	read	from	the	curve	the	magnitude	of
the	star	for	differenttimes	during	thisinterval.	according	to	myersthislight	curve	and
thespectroscopic	observations	ofthestar	pointtothe	existence	of	a	binarystar	of	very
remarkablecharactersuchasisshowntogether	withitsorbitandascaleof	milesin
fig.	132.	notethetide	which	each	ofthese	starsraisesinthe	otherthus	changingtheir
shapes	from	spheres	into	ellipsoids.	the	astonishing	dimensions	of	these	stars	are	in	part
compensated	by	their	very	low	density,	which	is	less	than	that	of	air,	so	that	their	masses
arerespectivelyonlytimesandtimesthatofthesun!	butthesedimensionsand
masses	perhaps	require	confirmation,	since	they	depend	upon	spectroscopic	observations
of	doubtful	interpretation.	in	fig.	132	what	relative	positions	must	the	stars	occupy	in	their
orbit	in	order	that	their	combined	light	should	give	β	lyræ	its	maximum	brightness?	what
position	will	furnish	a	minimum	brightness?
fig.	132.—the	system	of	β	lyræ.—myers.
fig.	132.—the	system	of	β	lyræ.—myers.
207.	variables	of	long	and	short	periods.—it	must	not	be	supposed	that	all	variable	stars
are	binaries	which	eclipse	each	other.	by	far	the	larger	part	of	them,	like	mira,	are	not	to
be	accounted	for	in	this	way,	and	a	distinction	which	is	pretty	well	marked	in	the	length	of
their	periods	is	significant	in	this	connection.	there	is	a	considerable	number	of	variable
stars	with	periods	shorter	than	a	month,	and	there	are	many	having	periods	longer	than	6
monthsbutthereareveryfewhavingperiodslongerthan18	monthsorintermediate
between	1	month	and	6	months,	so	that	it	is	quite	customary	to	divide	variable	stars	into
two	classes—those	of	long	period,	6	months	or	more,	and	those	of	short	period	less	than	6
monthsandthatthisdistinctioncorrespondstosomerealdifferenceinthestars
themselves	is	further	marked	by	the	fact	that	the	long-period	variables	are	prevailingly	red
incolorwhiletheshort-periodstarsarealmostwithoutexceptionwhiteorverypale
yellow.	in	factthe	longer	the	period	the	redder	the	star,	although	itis	notto	be	inferred
that	all	red	stars	are	variable;	a	considerable	percentage	of	them	shine	with	constant	light.
theeclipseexplanationofvariabilityholdsgoodonlyforshort-periodvariablesand
possibly	notforallofthem,	whileforthelong-period	variablesthereisnoexplanation
which	commandsthe	generalassent	ofastronomersalthough	unverified	hypothesesare
plenty.
the	number	of	stars	known	to	be	variableis	about	400,	while	a	considerable	number	of
othersare“suspectedandit	would	not	besurprisingifalargefraction	ofallthestars
should	be	found	to	fluctuate	a	little	in	brightness.	the	sun’s	spots	may	suffice	to	make	it	a
variable	star	with	a	period	of	11	years.
the	discovery	of	new	variables	is	of	frequent	occurrence,	and	may	be	expected	to	become
more	frequent	when	the	sky	is	systematically	explored	forthem	by	the	ingenious	device
suggested	by	pickering	and	illustrated	in	fig.	133.	a	given	region	ofthe	sky—e.	gthe
northern	crown—is	photographed	repeatedly	upon	the	same	plate,	which	is	shifted	a	little
ateachnewexposuresothatthestarsshallfallatnewplacesuponitthefinally
developed	plate	shows	a	row	of	images	corresponding	to	each	star,	and	if	the	star’s	light	is
constant	the	images	in	any	given	row	will	all	be	of	the	same	size,	as	are	most	of	those	in
fig.	133;	but	a	variable	star	such	as	is	shown	by	the	arrowhead	reveals	its	presence	by	the
brokenaspectofitsrowofdotsa	minimumbrilliancybeingshownbysmalleranda
maximum	by	larger	ones.	in	this	particular	case,	at	two	exposures	the	star	was	too	faint	to
print	its	image	upon	the	plate.
fig.	133.—discovery	of	a	variable	star	by	means	of	photography.—pickering.
fig.	133.—discovery	of	a	variable	star	by	means	of	photography.—pickering.
208.	new	stars.—next	to	the	variable	stars	of	very	long	or	very	irregular	period	stand	the
so-called	newortemporary	stars,	whichappearforthe	mostpartsuddenlyandaftera
brieftimeeithervanishaltogetherorsinktocomparativeinsignificancethesewere
formerlythoughttobeveryremarkableandunusualoccurrences—“thebirthofanew
world”—and	it	is	noteworthy	that	no	new	star	is	recorded	to	have	been	seen	from	1670	to
1848	a.	dforsincethattimethere	have	been	nolessthanfive	ofthem	visibletothe
nakedeyeandotherstelescopicinsofarasthesenewstarsarenotordinaryvariables
(mira,	first	seen	in	1596,	was	long	counted	as	a	new	star),	they	are	commonly	supposed
due	to	chance	encounters	between	stars	or	other	cosmic	bodies	moving	with	considerable
velocities	along	orbits	which	approach	very	close	to	each	other.	the	actual	collision	of	two
dark	bodies	moving	with	high	velocities	is	clearly	sufficient	to	produce	a	luminous	star—
e.	g.,	meteors—and	even	the	close	approach	of	two	cooled-off	stars,	might	result	in	tidal
actions	which	would	rend	open	their	crusts	and	pour	out	the	glowing	matter	from	within
so	as	to	produce	temporarily	a	very	great	accession	of	brightness.
themostfamousofallnewstarsisthatwhichaccordingtotychobrahe’sreport,
appeared	in	the	year	1572,	and	was	so	bright	when	at	its	best	as	to	be	seen	with	the	naked
eye	in	broad	daylight.	it	continued	visible,	though	with	fading	light,	for	about	16	months,
and	finally	disappeared	to	the	naked	eye,	although	there	is	some	reason	to	suppose	that	it
canbeidentifiedwitharuddystaroftheeleventhmagnitudeintheconstellation
cassiopeia,	whose	light	still	shows	traces	of	variability.
no	modern	temporary	star	approaches	that	of	tycho	in	splendor,	but	in	some	respects	the
recent	ones	surpass	it	in	interest,	since	it	has	been	possible	to	apply	the	spectroscope	to	the
analysis	oftheirlight	and	to	find	thereby	a	much	more	complex	set	of	conditionsinthe
star	than	would	have	been	suspected	from	its	light	changes	alone.
one	of	the	most	extraordinary	of	new	stars,	and	the	most	brilliant	one	since	that	of	tycho,
appearedsuddenlyintheconstellationperseusinfebruaryandforashorttime
equaled	capellainbrightness.	butitslightrapidly	waned,	with	periodicfluctuations	of
brightness	like	those	of	a	variable	star,	and	at	the	present	time	(september,	1902)	it	is	lost
tothe	naked	eye,	although	inthetelescope	it	still	shineslike	a	star	ofthe	ninth	ortenth
magnitude.
by	the	aid	of	powerful	photographic	apparatus,	during	the	period	of	its	waning	brilliancy	a
ring	offaintnebulous	matter	was	detectedsurroundingthestarand	driftingaroundand
away	from	it	much	as	if	a	series	of	nebulæ	had	been	thrown	off	by	the	star	at	the	time	of
its	sudden	outburst	of	light.	but	the	extraordinary	velocity	of	this	nebular	motion,	nearly	a
billion	miles	per	hour,	makes	such	an	explanation	almost	incredible,	and	astronomers	are
more	inclined	to	believe	that	the	ring	was	merely	a	reflection	of	the	star’s	own	light	from	a
cloudof	meteoric	matterinto	whicharapidly	movingdarkstarplungedandafterthe
fashion	of	terrestrial	meteors,	was	raised	to	brilliant	incandescence	by	the	collision.	if	we
assume	this	to	be	the	true	explanation	of	these	extraordinary	phenomena,	it	is	possible	to
show	from	the	known	velocity	with	which	light	travels	through	space	and	from	the	rate	at
whichthenebulaspreadthatthedistanceofnovaperseiasthenewstariscalled,
correspondstoaparallaxofaboutoneone-hundredthofasecondaresultthatisin
substance,	confirmed	by	direct	telescopic	measurements	of	its	parallax.
another	modern	temporary	star	is	nova	aurigæ,	which	appeared	suddenly	in	december,
1891,	waned,	and	in	the	following	april	vanished,	only	to	reappear	three	months	later	for
anotherseasonofrenewedbrightnessthespectraofboththese	modern	novcontain
both	dark	and	bright	lines	displaced	toward	opposite	ends	of	the	spectrum,	and	suggesting
the	doppler	effectthat	would	be	produced	bytwo	or	more	glowing	bodies	having	rapid
and	opposite	motions	in	the	line	of	sight.	but	the	most	recent	investigations	cast	discredit
on	this	explanation	and	leave	the	spectra	of	temporary	stars	still	a	subject	of	debate	among
astronomers,	with	respect	both	to	the	motion	they	indicate	and	the	intrinsic	nature	of	the
starsthemselvesthevaryingaspectofthespectrasuggestedatonetimethesun’s
chromosphere,	at	another	time	the	conditions	that	are	present	in	nebulæ,	etc.

chapter	xiv
stars	and	nebulæ
209.	stellar	colors.—we	have	already	seen	that	one	star	differs	from	another	in	respect	of
color	as	well	as	brightness,	and	the	diligent	student	of	the	sky	will	not	fail	to	observe	for
himself	how	the	luster	of	sirius	and	rigel	is	more	nearly	a	pure	white	than	is	that	of	any
other	stars	in	the	heavens,	while	at	the	other	end	of	the	scale	α	orionis	and	aldebaran	are
strongly	ruddy,	and	antares	presents	an	even	deeper	tone	of	red.	between	these	extremes
the	light	of	every	star	shows	a	mixture	of	the	rainbow	hues,	in	which	a	very	pale	yellow	is
the	predominant	color,	shading	off,	as	we	have	seen,	to	white	at	one	end	of	the	scale	and
redattheothertherearenogreenstarsorbluestarsorvioletstarssaveinone
exceptional	class	of	cases—viz.,	wherethetwo	components	of	a	double	star	are	of	very
different	brightness,	it	is	quite	the	usual	thing	for	them	to	have	different	colors,	and	then,
almost	without	exceptionthe	color	ofthe	fainter	starlies	nearertothe	violet	end	ofthe
spectrum	than	does	the	color	of	the	bright	one,	and	sometimes	shows	a	distinctly	blue	or
greenhueafinetypeofsuchdoublestariscygniinwhichthecomponentsare
respectively	yellow	and	blue,	and	the	yellow	star	furnishes	eight	times	as	much	light	as	the
blue	one.
the	exception	which	double	starsthus	maketothe	generalrule	of	stellar	colors,	yellow
and	red,	but	no	color	of	shorter	wave	length,	has	never	been	satisfactorily	explained,	but
the	rule	itself	presents	no	difficulties.	each	star	is	an	incandescent	body,	giving	off	radiant
energyofevery	wavelength	withinthelimitsofthevisiblespectrumandindeedfar
beyond	theselimitsifthis	radiant	energy	could	come	unhindered	to	our	eyes	every	star
wouldappearwhitebuttheyareallsurroundedbyatmospheres—analogoustothe
chromosphereandreversinglayerofthesun—whichabsorbaportionoftheirradiant
energy	and,	like	the	earth’s	atmosphere,	take	a	heavier	toll	from	the	violet	than	from	the
red	end	of	the	spectrum.	the	greater	the	absorption	in	the	star’s	atmosphere,	therefore,	the
feeblerandtheruddier	willbeitslightand	correspondingtothistheredstarsareasa
class	fainter	than	the	white	ones.
210.	chemistry	of	the	stars.—the	spectroscope	is	pre-eminentlytheinstrumentto	deal
with	this	absorption	of	light	in	the	stellar	atmospheres,	just	as	it	deals	with	that	absorption
in	the	sun’s	atmosphere	to	which	are	due	the	dark	lines	of	the	solar	spectrum,	although	the
faintness	of	starlight,	compared	with	that	of	the	sun,	presents	a	serious	obstacle	to	its	use.
despite	this	difficulty	most	of	the	lucid	stars	and	many	of	the	telescopic	ones	have	been
studied	with	the	spectroscope	and	found	to	be	similar	to	the	sun	and	the	earth	as	respects
the	materialof	whichthey	are	made.	suchfamiliarchemicalelementsas	hydrogen	and
iron,	carbon,	sodium,	and	calcium	are	scattered	broadcast	throughout	the	visible	universe,
and	while	it	would	be	unwarranted	by	the	present	state	of	knowledge	to	say	that	the	stars
contain	nothing	not	found	in	the	earth	and	the	sun,	it	is	evident	that	in	a	broad	way	their
substance	is	like	rather	than	unlike	that	composing	the	solar	system,	and	is	subject	to	the
same	physical	and	chemical	laws	which	obtain	here.	galileo	and	newton	extended	to	the
heavenstheterrestrialsciencesofmathematicsandmechanicsbutitremainedtothe
nineteenth	century	to	show	that	the	physics	and	chemistry	of	the	sky	are	like	the	physics
and	chemistry	of	the	earth.
211.	stellar	spectra.—when	the	spectra	of	great	numbers	of	stars	are	compared	one	with
anotheritis	found	that	they	bear	some	relation	to	the	colors	of	the	stars,	asindeed,	we
should	expect,	since	spectrum	and	color	are	both	produced	by	the	stellar	atmospheres,	and
it	is	found	useful	to	classify	these	spectra	into	three	types,	as	follows:
type	i.	sirian	stars.—speaking	generally,	the	stars	which	are	white	or	very	faintly	tinged
with	yellow,	furnish	spectra	like	that	of	sirius,	from	which	they	take	their	name,	or	that	of
β	aurigæ	(fig.	124),	whichisacontinuousspectrumespeciallyrichinenergy	ofshort
wavelength—ievioletandultra-violetlightandiscrossedbyarelativelysmall
numberofheavydarklinescorrespondingtothespectrumofhydrogensometimes,
howevertheselinesare	muchfainterthanishereshownand	wefindassociated	with
them	still	other	faint	ones	pointing	to	the	presence	of	other	metallic	substances	in	the	star’s
atmospherethesemetalliclinesarenotalwayspresentandsometimeseventhe
hydrogen	lines	themselves	are	lacking,	but	the	spectrum	is	always	rich	in	violet	and	ultra-
violet	light.
sincewithincreasingtemperatureabodyemitsacontinuallyincreasingproportionof
energy	of	short	wave	length	(§	118),	the	richness	of	these	spectra	in	such	energy	points	to
a	very	high	temperature	in	these	stars,	probably	surpassing	in	some	considerable	measure
thatofthesunstarswiththistypeofspectrumaremorenumerousthanallothers
combined,	but	next	to	them	in	point	of	numbers	stands—
typeiisolarstars.—tothistypeofspectrumbelongtheyellowstarswhichshow
spectra	like	that	of	the	sun,	or	of	pollux	(fig.	125).	these	are	not	so	rich	in	violet	light	as
are	those	of	type	i,	but	in	complexity	of	spectrum	and	in	the	number	of	their	absorption
lines	they	far	surpass	the	sirian	stars.	they	are	supposed	to	be	at	a	lower	temperature	than
the	sirian	stars,	and	a	much	larger	number	of	chemical	elements	seems	present	and	active
inthereversinglayer	oftheir	atmospheres.	the	strongresemblance	whichthesespectra
bear	to	that	of	the	sun,	together	with	the	fact	that	most	of	the	sun’s	stellar	neighbors	have
spectra	of	this	type,	justify	us	in	ranking	both	them	and	it	as	members	of	one	class,	called
solar	stars.
typeiiiredstars.—asmallnumberofstarsshowspectracomparablewiththatof
α	herculis(figinwhichtheblueandthevioletpartofthespectrumisalmost
obliteratedandtheremainingyellowandredpartsshownotonlydarklinesbutalso
numerous	broad	dark	bands,	sharp	at	one	edge,	and	gradually	fading	out	at	the	other.	it	is
this	selective	absorption,	extinguishing	the	blue	and	leaving	the	red	end	of	the	spectrum,
whichproducestheruddycolorofthesestarswhilethebandsintheirspectra“are
characteristicofchemicalcombinationsandtheirpresenceprovesthatatcertain
elevations	in	the	atmospheres	of	these	stars	the	temperature	has	sunk	so	low	that	chemical
combinationscanbeformedandmaintained(scheiner-frostoneofthechemical
compounds	here	indicated	is	a	hydrocarbon	similar	to	that	found	in	comets.	in	the	white
and	yellow	stars	the	temperatures	are	so	high	thatthe	same	chemical	elements,	although
present,	can	not	unite	one	with	another	to	form	compound	substances.
fig.	134.—the	spectrum	of	α	herculis.—espin.
fig.	134.—the	spectrum	of	α	herculis.—espin.
most	of	the	variable	stars	are	red	and	have	spectra	of	the	third	type;	but	this	does	not	hold
trueforthe	eclipse	variableslike	algolall	of	which	are	whitestars	withspectra	ofthe
first	type.	the	ordinary	variable	star	is	therefore	one	with	a	dense	atmosphere	of	relatively
low	temperature	and	complex	structure,	which	produces	the	prevailing	red	color	of	these
starsbyabsorbingthemajorpartoftheirradiantenergyofshortwavelengthwhile
allowingthelongerred	wavesto	escape.	althoughtheir	exact	natureis	not	understood,
there	can	be	little	doubt	that	the	fluctuation	in	the	light	of	these	stars	is	due	to	processes
takingplacewithinthestaritselfbutwhetheraboveorbelowitsphotosphereisstill
uncertain.
212.	classesofstars.—thereisnohard-and-fastdividinglinebetweenthesetypesof
stellarspectrabutthechangefromonetoanotherisbyinsensiblegradationslikethe
transitionfrom	youthto	manhoodandfrom	manhoodtooldageandalongthelineof
transition	are	to	be	found	numberless	peculiarities	and	varieties	of	spectra	not	enumerated
above—e.	g.,	afew	stars	show	not	only	dark	absorptionlinesintheirspectra	but	bright
lines	as	well,	whichlikethosein	fig.	48,	pointtothe	presence	ofincandescent	vapors,
even	in	the	outer	parts	of	their	atmospheres.	among	the	lucid	stars	about	75	per	cent	have
spectra	of	the	first	type,	23	per	cent	are	of	the	second	type,	1	per	cent	of	the	third	type,	and
the	remaining	1	per	cent	are	peculiar	or	of	doubtful	classification.	among	the	telescopic
starsitisprobablethatmuchthesamedistributionholdsbutinthepresentstateof
knowledge	it	is	not	prudent	to	speak	with	entire	confidence	upon	this	point.
thatthegreatnumberofstarswhosespectrahavebeenstudiedshouldadmitofa
classification	so	simple	as	the	above,	is	an	impressive	fact	which,	when	supplemented	by
the	further	fact	of	a	gradual	transition	from	one	type	of	spectrum	to	the	next,	leaves	little
room	for	doubt	that	in	the	stars	we	have	an	innumerable	throng	of	individuals	belonging	to
the	same	species	butin	differentstages	of	development,	andthatthe	sunis	only	one	of
theseindividualsofsomethinglessthanmediumsizeandinastageofdevelopment
which	is	not	at	all	peculiar,	since	it	is	shared	by	nearly	a	fourth	of	all	the	stars.
fig	135.—star	cluster	in	hercules.	fig	135.—star	cluster	in	hercules.
213.	star	clusters.—in	previous	chapters	we	have	noted	the	pleiades	and	præsepe	as	star
clusters	visible	to	the	naked	eye,	and	to	them	we	may	add	the	hyades,	near	aldebaran,	and
the	little	constellation	coma	berenices.	but	more	impressive	than	any	of	these,	although
visibleonlyinatelescopeisthesplendidclusterinherculeswhoseappearanceina
telescope	of	moderatesizeisshownin	fig.	135,	while	figisaphotographofthe
sameclustertakenwithaverylargereflectingtelescopethisisonlyatypeofmany
telescopicclusterswhicharescatteredovertheskyandwhicharemadeupofstars
packed	so	closely	together	as	to	become	indistinguishable,	one	from	another,	at	the	center
of	the	cluster.	within	an	area	which	could	be	covered	by	a	third	of	the	full	moon’s	face	are
crowdedinthisclustermorethanfivethousandstarswhichareunquestionablyclose
neighborsbutwhoseapparentnearnesstoeachotherisdoubtlessduetotheirgreat
distancefrom	usitis	quite	probablethateven	atthe	center	ofthis	cluster,	where	more
than	a	thousand	stars	are	included	within	a	radius	of	160”,	the	actual	distances	separating
adjoining	stars	are	much	greater	than	that	separating	earth	and	sun,	but	far	less	than	that
separating	the	sun	from	its	nearest	stellar	neighbor.
an	interesting	discovery	ofrecent	date,	made	by	professor	baileyin	photographing	star
clustersisthatsomefewofthemwhichareespeciallyrichinstarscontainan
extraordinary	number	of	variable	stars,	mostly	very	faint	and	of	short	period.	two	clusters,
one	in	the	northern	and	one	in	the	southern	hemisphere,	contain	each	more	than	a	hundred
variables,	and	an	even	more	extraordinary	case	is	presented	by	a	cluster,	called	messier	5,
notfarfromthestarserpentiswhichcontainsnolessthansixty-threevariablesall
about	of	the	fourteenth	magnitude,	all	having	light	periods	which	differ	but	little	from	half
a	day,	all	having	light	curves	of	about	the	same	shape,	and	all	having	a	range	of	brightness
from	maximum	to	minimum	of	about	one	magnitude.	an	extraordinary	set	of	coincidences
which	“points	unmistakably	to	a	common	origin	and	cause	of	variability.”
fig.	136.—star	cluster	in	hercules.—keeler.
fig.	136.—star	cluster	in	hercules.—keeler.
fig.	137.—the	andromeda	nebula	as	seen	in	a	very	small	telescope.
fig.	137.—the	andromeda	nebula	as	seen	in	a	very	small	telescope.
fig.	138.—the	andromeda	nebula	and	holmes’s	comet.	photographed	by	barnard.
fig.	138.—the	andromeda	nebula	and	holmes’s	comet.	photographed	by	barnard.
fig.	139.—a	drawing	of	the	andromeda	nebula.
fig.	139.—a	drawing	of	the	andromeda	nebula.
fig.	140.—a	photograph	of	the	andromeda	nebula.—roberts.
fig.	140.—a	photograph	of	the	andromeda	nebula.—roberts.
fig.	141.—types	of	nebulæ.	fig.	141.—types	of	nebulæ.
214.	nebulæ.—returning	to	fig.	136,	we	note	that	its	background	has	a	hazy	appearance,
and	that	at	its	center	the	stars	can	no	longer	be	distinguished,	but	blend	one	with	another
so	as	to	appear	like	a	bright	cloud.	the	outer	part	of	the	cluster	is	resolved	into	stars,	while
inthe	picturetheinner	portionis	notsoresolved,	althoughinthe	original	photographic
platetheindividualstarscan	be	distinguishedtothe	very	center	ofthe	clusterin	many
caseshoweverthisisnotpossibleandwehaveanirresolvableclusterwhichitis
customary	to	call	a	nebula	(latin,	little	cloud).
themostconspicuousexampleofthisinthenorthernheavensisthegreatnebulain
andromeda	(r.	a.	0h	37m,	dec.	+41°),	which	may	be	seen	with	the	naked	eye	as	a	faint
patch	of	foggy	light.	look	for	it.	this	appears	in	an	opera	glass	or	very	small	telescope	not
unlike	fig.	137,	which	is	reproduced	from	a	sketch.	fig.	138	is	from	a	photograph	of	the
same	objectshowing	essentiallythe	same	shape	asinthe	precedingfigure,	but	bringing
out	more	detail.	note	the	two	small	nebulæ	adjoining	the	large	one,	and	at	the	bottom	of
the	picture	an	object	which	might	easily	be	taken	for	another	nebula	but	which	is	in	fact	a
tailless	comet	that	chanced	to	be	passing	that	part	of	the	sky	when	the	picture	was	taken.
fig.	139	is	from	another	drawing	of	this	nebula,	although	it	is	hardly	to	be	recognized	as	a
representation	ofthe	samething;	butits	characteristicfeaturethetwo	dark	streaks	near
the	center	of	the	picture,	is	justified	in	part	by	fig.	140,	which	is	from	a	photograph	made
with	a	large	reflecting	telescope.
a	comparison	of	these	several	representations	of	the	same	thing	will	serve	to	illustrate	the
vaguenessofitsoutlinesandhowmuchtheimpressionstobederivedfromnebulæ
depend	uponthetelescopes	employed	and	uponthe	observer’s	own	prepossessions.	the
differences	among	the	pictures	can	not	be	due	to	any	change	in	the	nebula	itself,	for	half	a
century	ago	it	was	sketched	much	as	shown	in	the	latest	of	them	(fig.	140).
fig.	142.—the	trifid	nebula.—keeler.
fig.	142.—the	trifid	nebula.—keeler.
215.	typical	nebulæ.—some	of	the	fantastic	forms	which	nebulæ	present	in	the	telescope
are	shown	on	a	small	scalein	fig.	141,	butinrecent	years	astronomers	havelearnedto
placelittlerelianceupondrawingssuchasthesewhicharenowalmostentirely
supplanted	by	photographs	made	with	long	exposures	in	powerful	telescopes.	one	of	the
mostexquisiteofthesemodernphotographsisthatofthetrifidnebulainsagittarius
(fig.	142).	noteespeciallythedarklanesthatgivetothisnebulaitsnametrifidand
which	run	through	its	brightest	parts,	breaking	it	into	seemingly	independent	sections.	the
area	ofthesky	showninthis	cutisabout	15	per	centlessthanthat	covered	bythefull
moon.
fig.	143.—a	nebula	in	cygnus.—keeler.
fig.	143.—a	nebula	in	cygnus.—keeler.
fig.	143	shows	a	very	different	type	of	nebula,	found	in	the	constellation	cygnus,	which
appearsmadeupoffilamentscloselyintertwinedandstretchesacrosstheskyfora
distance	considerably	greater	than	the	moon’s	diameter.
fig.	144.—spiral	nebula	in	canes	venatici.—keeler.
fig.	144.—spiral	nebula	in	canes	venatici.—keeler.
a	muchsmallerbutequallystrikingnebulaisthatintheconstellationcanesvenatici
(fig.	144),	which	shows	a	most	extraordinary	spiral	structure,	as	if	the	stars	composing	it
were	flowing	in	along	curved	lines	toward	a	center	of	condensation.	the	diameter	of	the
circularpartofthisnebulaomittingtheprojectiontowardthebottom	ofthepictureis
aboutfive	minutes	ofarcasixth	part	ofthe	diameter	ofthe	moonanditsthicknessis
probably	very	small	compared	with	its	breadth,	perhaps	not	much	exceeding	the	width	of
the	spiral	streams	which	compose	it.	note	how	the	bright	stars	that	appear	within	the	area
ofthis	nebulafallonthestreams	of	nebulous	matterasifthey	were	part	ofthem.	this
characteristic	grouping	of	the	stars,	which	is	followed	in	many	other	nebulæ,	shows	that
they	are	really	part	and	parcel	of	the	nebula	and	not	merely	on	line	with	it.	fig.	145	shows
how	a	great	nebula	is	associated	with	the	star	ρ	ophiuchi.
fig.	145.—great	nebula	about	the	star	ρ	ophiuchi.—barnard.
fig.	145.—great	nebula	about	the	star	ρ	ophiuchi.—barnard.
probablythe	mostimpressive	ofall	nebulisthe	great	onein	orion(fig.	146),	whose
position	is	shown	on	the	star	map	between	rigel	and	ζ	orionis.	look	for	it	with	an	opera
glassorevenwiththeunaidedeyethisissometimescalledanamorphous—ie.,
shapeless—nebula,	because	it	presents	no	definite	form	which	the	eye	can	grasp	and	little
traceofstructureororganizationitis“withoutformandvoidatleastinitscentral
portions,	although	on	its	edges	curved	filaments	may	be	traced	streaming	away	from	the
brighterpartsofthecentralregionthisnebulaasshowninfigcoversanarea
about	equal	to	that	of	the	full	moon,	without	counting	as	any	part	of	this	the	companion
nebula	shown	at	one	side,	but	photographs	made	with	suitable	exposures	show	that	faint
outlying	parts	of	the	nebula	extend	in	curved	lines	over	the	larger	part	of	the	constellation
orion.	indeed,	over	alarge	part	ofthe	entire	sky	the	background	is	faintly	covered	with
nebulous	light	whose	brighter	portions,	if	each	were	counted	as	a	separate	nebula,	would
carry	the	total	number	of	such	objects	well	into	the	hundreds	of	thousands.
fig.	146.—the	orion	nebula.
fig.	146.—the	orion	nebula.
the	pleiades	(plate	iv)	present	a	case	of	a	resolvable	star	cluster	projected	against	such	a
nebulous	background	whose	varying	intensity	should	be	noted	in	the	figure.	a	part	of	this
nebulous	matter	is	shown	in	wisps	extending	from	one	star	to	the	next,	after	the	fashion	of
a	bridge,	andleavinglittle	doubtthatthe	nebulais	actually	a	part	ofthe	cluster	and	not
merely	a	background	for	it.
the	pleiades	(after	a	photograph)
the	pleiades	(after	a	photograph)
fig.	147	shows	a	series	of	so-called	double	nebulæ	perhaps	comparable	with	double	stars,
althoughthe	mostrecentphotographic	workseemstoindicatethattheyarereallyfaint
spiral	nebulæ	in	which	only	the	brightest	parts	are	shown	by	the	telescope.
accordingtokeelerthespiralistheprevailingtypeofnebulandwhilefig144
presents	the	most	perfect	example	of	such	a	nebula,	the	student	should	not	fail	to	note	that
the	andromeda	nebula	(fig.	140)	shows	distinct	traces	of	a	spiral	structure,	only	here	we
do	notseeitstrueshapethe	nebula	beingturned	nearly	edgewisetoward	ussothatits
presumably	circular	outline	is	foreshortened	into	a	narrow	ellipse.
fig.	147.—double	nebulæ.	herschel.	fig.	147.—double	nebulæ.	herschel.
anothertype	ofnebulaofsomeconsequence	presentsinthetelescoperound	diskslike
thoseofuranusorneptuneandthisappearancehasgiventhemthenameplanetary
nebulæ.	the	comet	in	fig.	138,	if	smaller,	would	represent	fairly	well	the	nebulæ	of	this
typesometimesaplanetarynebulahasastaratitscenterandsometimesitappears
hollow,	like	a	smoke	ring,	and	is	then	called	a	ring	nebula.	the	most	famous	of	these	is	in
the	constellation	lyra,	not	far	from	vega.
216.	spectra	of	nebulæ.—a	star	cluster,	like	the	one	in	hercules,	shows,	of	course,	stellar
spectraandeven	whenirresolvablethespectrumisacontinuousonetestifyingtothe
presence	ofstarsalthoughtheystandtoo	closetogetherto	beseparatelyseen.	butina
certainnumberofnebulthespectrumisaltogetherdifferentadiscontinuousone
containingonlyafewbrightlinesshowingthatherethenebularlightcomesfrom
glowinggases	whicharesubjecttonoconsiderablepressuretheplanetarynebulall
have	spectra	ofthis	kind	and	make	up	about	half	of	allthe	known	gaseous	nebulæ.	itis
worthy	of	note	that	a	century	ago	sir	william	herschel	had	observed	a	green	shimmer	in
the	light	of	certain	nebulæ	which	led	him	to	believe	that	they	were	“not	of	a	starry	nature,”
aconclusionwhichhasbeenabundantlyconfirmedbythespectroscopethegreen
shimmerisinfactcausedbyalineinthegreenpartofthespectrumthatisalways
present	and	is	always	the	brightest	part	of	the	spectrum	of	gaseous	nebulæ.
infaintnebulthislineconstitutesthe	wholeoftheirvisiblespectrumbutinbrighter
ones	two	or	three	other	and	fainter	lines	are	usually	associated	with	it,	and	a	very	bright
nebula,	like	that	in	orion,	may	show	a	considerable	number	of	extra	lines,	but	for	the	most
part	they	can	not	be	identified	in	the	spectrum	of	any	terrestrial	substances.	an	exception
to	this	is	found	in	the	hydrogen	lines,	which	are	well	marked	in	most	spectra	of	gaseous
nebulæ,	and	there	are	indications	of	one	or	two	other	known	substances.
217.	density	of	nebulæ.—itis	known	from	laboratory	experimentsthat	diminishingthe
pressure	to	which	an	incandescent	gas	is	subject,	diminishes	the	number	of	lines	contained
in	its	spectrum,	and	we	may	surmise	from	the	very	simple	character	and	few	lines	of	these
nebular	spectra	that	the	gas	which	produces	them	has	a	very	small	density.	but	this	is	far
from	showing	that	the	nebula	itself	is	correspondingly	attenuated,	for	we	must	not	assume
thatthisshininggasisallthatexistsinthenebulasofarastelescopeorcameraare
concernedthere	may	be	associated	withit	any	amount	of	dark	matter	which	can	not	be
seen	because	it	sends	to	us	no	light.	it	is	easy	to	think	in	this	connection	of	meteoric	dust
or	the	stuff	of	which	comets	are	made,	for	these	seem	to	be	scattered	broadcast	on	every
side	of	the	solar	system	and	may,	perchance,	extend	out	to	the	region	of	the	nebulæ.
but,	whatever	may	beassociatedinthe	nebula	withthe	glowing	gas	which	weseethe
totalamountofmatterinvisibleaswellasvisiblemustbeverysmallorratherits
average	density	mustbe	verysmallforthespace	occupied	bysucha	nebulaasthatof
orionissogreatthatiftheaveragedensityofits	matterwereequaltothatofairthe
resulting	mass	byits	attraction	would	exert	a	sensible	effect	upon	the	motion	ofthe	sun
through	space.	the	brighter	parts	of	this	nebula	as	seen	from	the	earth	subtend	an	angle	of
about	half	a	degree,	and	while	we	know	nothing	of	its	distance	from	us,	it	is	easy	to	see
that	the	farther	it	is	away	the	greater	must	be	its	real	dimensions,	and	that	this	increase	of
bulk	and	mass	with	increasing	distance	will	just	compensate	the	diminishing	intensity	of
gravity	at	great	distances,	so	that	for	a	given	angular	diameter—e.	g.,	half	a	degree—the
force	with	which	this	nebula	attracts	the	sun	depends	upon	its	density	but	not	at	all	upon
its	distance.	now,	the	nebula	must	attract	the	sun	in	some	degree,	and	must	tend	to	move	it
and	the	planets	in	an	orbit	about	the	attracting	center	so	that	year	after	year	we	should	see
the	nebulafrom	slightly	different	points	of	view,	andthis	changed	point	of	view	should
produce	a	change	in	the	apparent	direction	of	the	nebula	from	us—i.	e.,	a	proper	motion,
whose	amount	would	depend	upon	the	attracting	force,	and	therefore	upon	the	density	of
theattractingmatterobservationsoftheorionnebulashowthatitspropermotionis
whollyinappreciablecertainlyfarlessthanhalfasecondofarcperyearand
correspondingtothisamountofproper	motionthe	mean	densityofthe	nebula	mustbe
some	millions	of	times	(1010	according	to	ranyard)	less	than	that	of	air	at	sea	level—i.	e.,
the	average	density	throughout	the	nebula	is	comparable	with	that	of	those	upper	parts	of
the	earth’s	atmosphere	in	which	meteors	first	become	visiblemotionofnebulæ.—theextrememinutenessoftheirpropermotionsisa
characteristic	feature	of	all	nebulæ.	indeed,	there	is	hardly	a	known	case	of	sensible	proper
motion	of	one	ofthese	bodies,	although	a	dozen	or	more	ofthem	show	velocitiesinthe
line	of	sight	ranging	in	amount	from	+30	to	-40	miles	per	second,	the	plus	sign	indicating
an	increasing	distance.	while	a	part	of	these	velocities	may	be	only	apparent	and	due	to
the	motionofearthandsunthroughspaceapartatleastisreal	motionofthenebulæ
themselves.	these	seem	to	move	through	the	celestial	spaces	in	much	the	same	way	and
with	the	same	velocities	as	do	the	stars,	and	their	smaller	proper	motions	across	the	line	of
sight(angularmotionsareanindexoftheirgreatdistancefromusnoonehasever
succeeded	in	measuring	the	parallax	of	a	nebula	or	star	cluster.
fig.	148.—a	part	of	the	milky	way.
fig.	148.—a	part	of	the	milky	way.
the	law	of	gravitation	presumably	holds	sway	within	these	bodies,	and	the	fact	that	their
severalpartsandthestarswhichareinvolved	withinthemalthoughattractedbyeach
otherhaveshownlittleornochangeofpositionduringthepastcenturyisfurther
evidence	of	their	low	density	and	feeble	attraction.	in	a	few	cases,	however,	there	seem	to
bein	progress	within	a	nebulachanges	of	brightnesssothat	what	wasformerly	afaint
part	has	become	a	brighter	one,	or	vice	versa;	but,	on	the	whole,	even	these	changes	are
very	small.
fig.	149.—the	milky	way	near	θ	ophiuchi.—barnard.
fig.	149.—the	milky	way	near	θ	ophiuchi.—barnard.
219.	the	milky	way.—closely	relatedto	nebulæ	and	star	clustersis	anotherfeature	of
the	sky,	the	galaxy	or	milky	way,	with	whose	appearancetothe	unaided	eyethe	student
shouldbecomefamiliarbydirectstudyofthethingitselffigsandarefrom
photographs	of	two	small	parts	of	it,	and	serve	to	bring	out	the	small	stars	of	which	it	is
composed.	every	star	shown	in	these	pictures	is	invisible	to	the	naked	eye,	although	their
combinedlightiseasilyseenthegeneralcourseofthegalaxyacrosstheheavensis
shown	in	the	star	maps,	but	these	contain	no	indication	of	the	wealth	of	detail	which	even
the	naked	eye	may	detect	in	it.	bright	and	faint	parts,	dark	rifts	which	cut	it	into	segments,
here	and	there	a	hole	as	if	the	ribbon	of	light	had	been	shot	away—such	are	some	of	the
features	to	be	found	by	attentive	examination.
fig.	150.—the	milky	way	near	β	cygni.—barnard.
fig.	150.—the	milky	way	near	β	cygni.—barnard.
speaking	generally,	the	course	of	the	milky	way	is	a	great	circle	completely	girdling	the
skyandhavingitsnorthpoleintheconstellationcomaberenicesthewidthofthis
stream	oflightis	very	differentin	different	parts	ofthe	heavensamounting	whereitis
widest,	in	lyra	and	cygnus,	to	something	more	than	30°,	although	its	boundaries	are	too
vague	and	ill	defined	to	permit	much	accuracy	of	measurement.	observe	the	very	bright
part	between	β	and	γ	cygni,	nearly	opposite	vega,	and	note	how	even	an	opera	glass	will
partiallyresolvethenebulouslightintoagreatnumberofstarswhicharehererather
brighter	than	in	other	parts	of	its	course.	but	the	resolution	into	stars	is	only	partial,	and
therestillremainsabackgroundofunresolvedshimmerfigisaphotographofa
small	part	of	this	region	in	which,	although	each	fleck	of	light	represents	a	separate	star,
the	galaxy	is	not	completely	resolved.	compare	with	this	region,	rich	in	stars,	the	nearly
empty	space	between	the	branches	of	the	galaxy	a	little	west	of	altair.	another	hole	in	the
milky	way	may	be	found	a	little	north	and	east	of	α	cygni,	and	between	the	extremes	of
abundance	and	poverty	here	noted	there	may	be	found	every	gradation	of	nebulous	light.
the	milky	way	is	not	so	simple	in	its	structure	as	might	at	first	be	thought,	but	a	clear	and
moonless	night	is	required	to	bring	out	its	details.	the	nature	of	these	details,	the	structure
of	the	galaxy,	its	shape	and	extent,	the	arrangement	of	its	parts,	and	their	relation	to	stars
and	nebulæ	in	general,	have	been	subjects	of	much	speculation	by	astronomers	and	others
who	have	sought	to	trace	out	in	this	way	what	is	called	the	construction	of	the	heavens.
220.	distributionofthestars.—howfaroutintospacedothestarsextend?	arethey
limited	or	infinite	in	number?	do	they	form	a	system	of	mutually	related	parts,	or	are	they
bunched	promiscuously,	each	for	itself,	without	reference	to	the	others?	here	is	what	has
been	well	called	“the	most	important	problem	of	stellar	astronomy,	the	acquisition	of	well-
foundedideasaboutthedistributionofthestarswhilemanyoftheideasuponthis
subject	which	have	been	advanced	by	eminent	astronomers	and	which	are	still	current	in
thebooksarecertainlywrongandfewoftheirspeculationsalongthislineare
demonstrablytruethethemeitselfisofsuchgrandeurandpermanentinterestasto
demandatleastabriefconsiderationbutbeforeproceedingtoitsspeculativeside	we
need	to	collect	facts	upon	which	to	build,	and	these,	however	inadequate,	are	in	the	main
simple	and	not	far	to	seek.
parallaxes,	proper	motions,	motions	in	the	line	of	sight,	while	pertinent	to	the	problem	of
stellar	distribution,	are	of	small	availsincethey	arefartoo	scantyin	number	and	relate
onlytolimited	classes	ofstars,	usuallythe	very	bright	ones	orthose	nearesttothesun.
almost	the	sole	available	data	are	contained	in	the	brightness	of	the	stars	and	the	way	in
which	they	seem	scattered	in	the	sky.	the	most	casual	survey	of	the	heavens	is	enough	to
show	that	the	stars	are	not	evenly	sprinkled	upon	it.	the	lucid	stars	are	abundant	in	some
regions,	few	in	others,	and	the	laborious	star	gauges,	actual	counting	of	the	stars	in	sample
regions	of	the	sky,	which	have	been	made	by	the	herschels,	celoria,	and	others,	suffice	to
showthatthislackofuniformityindistributionisevenmoremarkedlytrueofthe
telescopic	stars.
the	rate	of	increase	in	the	number	of	stars	from	one	magnitude	to	the	next,	as	shown	inisproofofanotherkindofirregularityintheirdistributionitisnotdifficultto
show,	mathematically,	that	if	in	distant	regions	of	space	the	stars	were	on	the	average	as
numerous	and	as	bright	as	they	are	in	the	regions	nearer	to	the	sun,	then	the	stars	of	any
particularmagnitudeoughttobefourtimesasnumerousasthoseofthenextbrighter
magnitude—e.	gfourtimes	as	many	sixth-magnitude	stars	asthere	arefifth-magnitude
ones.	but,	as	we	have	already	seen	in	§	187,	by	actual	count	there	are	only	three	times	as
manyandfromthediscrepancybetweenthesenumbersanactualthreefoldincrease
instead	of	a	fourfold	one,	we	must	conclude	that	on	the	whole	the	stars	near	the	sun	are
either	bigger	or	brighter	or	more	numerous	than	in	the	remoter	depths	of	space.
221.	the	stellar	system.—but	the	arrangement	of	the	stars	is	not	altogether	lawless	and
chaotictherearetracesoforderandsystemandamongthesethemilky	wayisthe
dominant	feature.	telescope	and	photographic	plate	alike	show	that	it	is	made	up	of	stars
whichalthoughquiteirregularlyscatteredalongitscourseareontheaveragesome
twenty	times	as	numerous	in	the	galaxy	as	atits	poles,	and	which	thin	out	as	we	recede
from	it	on	either	side,	at	first	rapidly	and	then	more	slowly.	this	tendency	to	cluster	along
themilkywayismuchmorepronouncedamongtheveryfainttelescopicstarsthan
among	the	brighter	ones,	for	the	lucid	stars	and	the	telescopic	ones	down	to	the	tenth	or
eleventh	magnitude,	while	very	plainly	showing	the	clustering	tendency,	are	not	more	than
threetimes	as	numerousinthe	galaxy	asinthe	constellations	mostremotefrom	ititis
remarkable	as	showing	the	condensation	of	the	brightest	stars	that	one	half	of	all	the	stars
intheskywhicharebrighterthanthesecondmagnitudeareincludedwithinabelt
extending	12°	on	either	side	of	the	center	line	of	the	galaxy.
inadditiontothisgeneralcondensationofstarstowardthemilkywaythereare
peculiaritiesinthedistributionofcertainclassesofstarswhichareworthattention.
planetary	nebulæ	and	new	stars	are	seldomif	everfoundfarfromthe	milky	way,	and
stars	with	brightlinesintheirspectra	especially	affectthisregion	ofthe	sky.	stars	with
spectraofthefirsttype—sirianstars—aremuchmorestronglycondensedtowardthe
milky	way	than	are	stars	of	the	solar	type,	and	in	consequence	of	this	the	milky	way	is
peculiarly	rich	in	light	of	short	wave	lengths.	resolvable	star	clusters	are	so	much	more
numerousinthegalaxythanelsewherethatitscourseacrossthesky	wouldbeplainly
indicated	by	their	grouping	upon	a	map	showing	nothing	but	clusters	of	this	kind.
on	the	other	hand,	nebulæ	as	a	class	show	a	distinct	aversion	for	the	galaxy,	and	are	found
most	abundantly	in	those	parts	of	the	sky	farthest	from	it,	much	as	if	they	represented	raw
material	which	was	lacking	along	the	milky	way,	because	already	worked	up	to	make	the
stars	which	are	there	so	numerous.
222.	relation	of	the	sun	to	the	milky	way.—the	fact	that	the	galaxy	is	a	great	circle	of
the	sky,	but	only	of	moderate	width,	shows	that	it	is	a	widely	extended	and	comparatively
thin	stratum	of	stars	within	which	the	solar	system	lies,	a	member	of	the	galactic	system,
and	probably	not	very	far	from	its	center.	this	position,	however,	is	not	to	be	looked	upon
as	a	permanent	onesincethesun’s	motion,	whichlies	nearlyinthe	plane	ofthe	milky
wayisceaselesslyalteringitsrelationtothecenter	ofthatsystemand	may	ultimately
carry	us	outside	its	limits.
the	milky	way	itself	is	commonly	thought	to	be	a	ring,	or	series	of	rings,	like	the	coils	of
the	great	spiral	nebulain	andromeda,	and	separated	from	us	by	a	space	far	greaterthan
the	thickness	of	the	ring	itself.	note	in	figs.	149	and	150	how	the	background	is	made	up
of	bright	and	dark	parts	curiously	interlaced,	and	presenting	much	the	appearance	of	a	thin
sheet	of	cloud	through	which	we	look	to	barren	space	beyond.	while,	mathematically,	this
appearance	can	not	be	considered	as	proof	that	the	galaxy	is	in	fact	a	distant	ring,	rather
than	a	sheet	of	starry	matter	stretching	continuously	from	the	nearer	stellar	neighbors	of
the	sun	into	the	remotest	depths	of	space,	nevertheless,	most	students	of	the	question	hold
ittobesucharingofstarswhicharerelativelyclosetogetherwhileitscenteris
comparatively	vacant,	although	even	here	are	some	hundreds	of	thousands	of	stars	which
on	the	whole	have	a	tendency	to	cluster	near	its	plane	and	to	crowd	together	a	little	more
densely	than	elsewhere	in	the	region	where	the	sun	is	placeddimensionsofthegalaxy.—thedimensionsofthisstellarsystemarewholly
unknown,	but	there	can	be	no	doubt	that	it	extends	farther	in	the	plane	of	the	milky	way
than	atrightanglestothat	planeforstars	ofthefifteenth	andsixteenth	magnitudes	are
commoninthegalaxyandtestifybytheirfeeblelighttotheirgreatdistancefromthe
earth,	while	nearthe	poles	ofthe	milky	way	there	seem	to	be	few	stars	fainterthan	the
twelfth	magnitude.	herschel,	with	his	telescope	of	18	inches	aperture,	could	count	in	the
milky	way	more	than	a	dozen	times	as	many	stars	per	square	degree	as	could	celoria	with
atelescopeofinchesaperturebutaroundthepolesofthegalaxythetwotelescopes
showedpracticallythesamenumberofstarsindicatingthathereeventhesmaller
telescope	reachedtothelimits	ofthe	stellar	system.	very	recentlyindeedthetelescope
with	whichfig140	wasphotographedseemstohavereachedthefarthestlimitofthe
milkywayforonaphotographicplateofoneofitsrichestregionsrobertsfindsit
completely	resolved	into	stars	which	stand	out	upon	a	black	background	with	no	trace	of
nebulous	light	between	them.
224.	beyondthe	milky	way.—eachadditionalstepintothedepthsofspacebringsus
intoaregion	of	whichlessisknownand	whatlies	beyondthe	milky	wayislargelya
matter	of	conjecture.	we	shrink	from	thinking	it	an	infinite	void,	endless	emptiness,	and
our	intellectual	sympathies	go	out	to	lambert’s	speculation	of	a	universe	filled	with	stellar
systems,	of	which	ours,	bounded	by	the	galaxy,	is	only	one.	there	is,	indeed,	little	direct
evidence	that	other	such	systems	exist,	but	the	andromeda	nebula	is	not	altogether	unlike
agalaxy	withacentralcloudofstarsandinthesouthernhemisphereinvisibleinour
latitudes,	are	two	remarkable	stellar	bodies	like	the	milky	way	in	appearance,	but	cut	off
from	all	apparent	connection	with	it,	much	as	we	might	expect	to	find	independent	stellar
systems,	if	such	there	be.
these	two	bodies	are	known	as	the	magellanic	clouds,	and	individually	bear	the	names	of
major	and	minor	nubecula.	accordingto	sirjohn	herschel“the	nubecula	majorlike
the	minor,	consists	partly	of	large	tracts	and	ill-defined	patches	of	irresolvable	nebula,	and
of	nebulosity	in	every	stage	of	resolution	up	to	perfectly	resolved	stars	like	the	milky	way,
asalsoofregularandirregularnebulofglobularclustersineverystageof
resolvability,	and	of	clustering	groups	sufficiently	insulated	and	condensed	to	come	under
the	designation	ofclusters	ofstarsits	outlinesare	vague	andsomewhat	uncertain,	but
surely	include	an	area	of	more	than	40	square	degrees—i.	e.,	as	much	as	the	bowl	of	the
big	dipper—and	withinthis	area	herschel	counted	several	hundred	nebulæ	and	clusters
“whichfar	exceeds	anythingthatisto	be	met	within	any	otherregion	ofthe	heavens.”
althoughitsexcessivecomplexityofdetailbaffledherschel’sattemptsatartistic
delineationithasyieldedtothemodernphotographicprocesseswhichshowthe
nubecula	majorto	be	an	enormousspiral	nebula	made	up	ofsubordinatestars,	nebulæ,
and	clusters,	as	is	the	milky	way.
comparedwiththeandromedanebulaitsgreaterangularextentsuggestsasmaller
distancealthoughforthepresentalleffortsatdeterminingtheparallaxofeitherseem
hopeless.	but	the	spiral	form	which	is	common	to	both	suggests	that	the	milky	way	itself
maybeagiganticspiralnebulanear	whosecenterliesthesunahumble	memberofa
great	cluster	of	stars	which	is	roughly	globular	in	shape,	but	flattened	at	the	poles	of	the
galaxy	and	completely	encircled	by	its	coils.	however	plausible	such	a	view	may	appear,
itisforthe	presentatleast,	pure	hypothesisalthough	vigorously	advocated	by	easton,
who	bases	his	argument	upon	the	appearance	of	the	galaxy	itself.
225.	absorptionofstarlight.—wehavehadabundantoccasiontolearnthatatleast
withintheconfinesofthesolarsystemmeteoricmattercosmicdustisprofusely
scattered,	and	it	appears	not	improbable	that	the	same	is	true,	although	in	smaller	degree,
in	even	the	remoter	parts	of	space.	in	this	case	the	light	which	comes	from	the	farther	stars
overapathrequiring	manycenturiestotravel,	mustbeinsome	measureabsorbedand
enfeebledbytheobstacleswhichitencountersonthewayunlesscelestialspaceis
transparentto	animprobable	degreetheremoterstars	do	notshowtheirtrue	brightness;
there	is	a	certain	limit	beyond	which	no	star	is	able	to	send	its	light,	and	beyond	which	the
universe	must	beto	us	a	blank.	a	lighthousethrows	intothe	fog	its	beams	onlyto	have
themextinguishedbeforeasinglemileispassedandthoughthecelestiallightsshine
fartheralimittotheirreachisnonethelesscertainif	meteoricdustexistsoutsidethe
solarsystemifthereissuchanabsorptionoflightinspaceasseemsplausiblethe
universe	may	wellbelimitlessandthenumberofstellarsystemsinfinitealthoughthe
mostattenuatedofdustcloudssufficestoconcealfromusandtoshutofffromour
investigation	all	save	a	minor	fraction	of	it	and	them.

chapter	xv
growth	and	decay
226.	nature	of	the	problem.—to	use	a	common	figure	of	speech,	the	universe	is	alive.
we	have	found	it	filled	with	an	activity	that	manifests	itself	not	only	in	the	motions	of	the
heavenly	bodies	along	their	orbits,	but	which	extends	to	their	minutest	parts,	the	molecules
and	atoms,	whose	vibrations	furnish	the	radiant	energy	given	off	by	sun	and	stars.	some	of
these	activities,	such	as	the	motions	of	the	heavenly	bodies	in	their	orbits,	seem	fitted	to	be
of	endless	duration;	while	others,	like	the	radiation	of	light	and	heat,	are	surely	temporary,
and	sooner	or	later	must	come	to	an	end	and	be	replaced	by	something	different.	the	study
of	things	as	they	are	thus	leads	inevitably	to	questions	of	what	has	been	and	what	is	to	be.
a	sound	science	should	furnish	some	account	of	the	universe	of	yesterday	and	to-morrow
as	wellasofto-dayand	weneednotshrinkfromsuchquestionsalthoughanswersto
them	must	be	vague	and	in	great	measure	speculative.
thehistorianof	americafindslittledifficulty	witheventsofthenineteenthcenturyor
even	the	eighteenth,	but	the	sources	of	information	about	america	in	the	fifteenth	century
aremuchlessdefinitethetenthcenturypresentsalmostablankandthehistoryof
american	mankind	in	the	first	century	of	the	christian	era	is	wholly	unknown.	so,	as	we
attempt	to	look	into	the	past	or	the	future	of	the	heavens,	we	must	expect	to	find	the	mists
ofobscuritygrowdenserwithremoterperiodsuntileventhevaguestoutlinesofits
developmentarelostand	wearecompelledtosaybeyondthisliestheunknown.	our
account	of	growth	and	decay	in	the	universe,	therefore,	can	not	aspire	to	cover	the	whole
duration	ofthings,	but	must	belimitedinitsscopeto	certain	chapters	whose	epochslie
near	to	the	time	in	which	we	live,	and	even	for	these	we	need	to	bear	constantly	in	mind
the	logical	bases	of	such	an	inquiry	and	the	limitations	which	they	impose	upon	us.
227.	logical	bases	and	limitations.—the	first	of	these	bases	is:	an	adequate	knowledge
ofthepresentuniverseouronlyhopeofreadingthepastandfutureliesinan
understanding	of	the	present;	not	necessarily	a	complete	knowledge	of	it,	but	one	which	is
soundsofarasitgoesourpositionislikethatofadetectivewhoiscalleduponto
unravel	a	mystery	or	crime,	and	who	must	commence	with	the	traces	that	have	been	left
behindinitscommissionthefootprintthebloodstainthebrokenglassmustbe
examined	and	comparedandfashionedinto	atheory	of	howthey	cameto	beand	as	a
wrong	understanding	of	these	elements	is	sure	to	vitiate	the	theories	based	upon	them,	so	a
false	science	ofthe	universe	asit	now	is,	will	surely	give	a	false	account	of	whatit	has
been;	whileacorrectbutincompleteknowledgeofthepresentdoesnot	whollybaran
understanding	of	the	past,	but	only	puts	us	in	the	position	of	the	detective	who	correctly
understands	what	he	sees	but	fails	to	take	note	of	other	facts	which	might	greatly	aid	him.
the	second	basis	of	our	inquiry	is:	the	assumed	permanence	of	natural	laws.	the	law	of
gravitation	certainly	held	true	a	century	ago	as	well	as	a	year	ago,	and	for	aught	we	know
to	the	contrary	it	may	have	been	a	law	of	the	universe	for	untold	millions	of	years;	but	that
it	has	prevailed	for	so	long	a	time	is	a	pure	assumption,	although	a	necessary	one	for	our
purposesowiththoseotherlawsofmathematicsandmechanicsandphysicsand
chemistry	to	which	we	must	appeal;	if	there	was	ever	a	time	or	place	in	which	they	did	not
hold	true,	that	time	and	place	lie	beyond	the	scope	of	our	inquiry,	and	are	in	the	domain
inaccessible	to	scientific	research.	it	is	for	this	reason	that	science	knows	nothing	and	can
knownothingofacreationoranendoftheuniversebutconsidersonlyitsorderly
development	within	limited	periods	of	time.	what	kind	of	a	past	universe	would,	under	the
operation	of	known	laws,	develop	into	the	present	one,	is	the	question	with	which	we	have
to	deal,	and	of	it	we	may	say	with	helmholtz:	“from	the	standpoint	of	science	this	is	no
idle	speculation	but	an	inquiry	concerning	the	limitations	of	its	methods	and	the	scope	of
its	known	laws.”
toferretouttheprocessesbywhichtheheavenlybodieshavebeenbroughttotheir
present	condition	we	seek	first	of	all	for	lines	of	development	now	in	progress	which	tend
to	change	the	existing	order	of	things	into	something	different,	and,	having	found	these,	to
tracetheireffectsintobothpastandfuture.	anyforcehoweversmalloranyprocess,
however	slow,	may	produce	greatresultsifit	works	always	and	ceaselesslyinthe	same
direction,	and	it	is	in	these	processes,	whose	trend	is	never	reversed,	that	we	find	a	partial
clew	to	both	past	and	future.
228.	the	sun’s	development.—the	first	of	these	to	claim	our	attention	is	the	shrinking	of
the	sun’s	diameter	which,	as	we	have	seen	in	chapter	x,	is	the	means	by	which	the	solar
output	of	radiant	energy	is	maintained	from	year	to	year.	its	amount,	only	a	few	feet	per
annum,	is	far	too	small	to	be	measured	with	any	telescope;	but	it	is	cumulative,	working
century	after	century	in	the	same	direction,	and,	given	time	enough,	it	will	produce	in	the
futureand	must	have	producedinthe	pastenormoustransformationsinthesun’s	bulk
and	equally	significant	changes	in	its	physical	condition.
thusas	weattempttotracethesun’shistoryintothepastthefartherback	wegothe
greatershall	weexpecttofinditsdiameterandthegreaterthespace(volumethrough
whichits	moleculesarespread.	byreason	ofthisexpansionits	density	must	have	been
less	then	than	now,	and	by	going	far	enough	back	we	may	even	reach	a	time	at	which	the
density	wascomparable	with	what	wefindinthenebulofto-dayifourideasofthe
sun’spresent	mechanismaresoundthenasanecessaryconsequenceoftheseitspast
career	must	have	been	a	process	of	condensationin	whichitscomponent	particles	were
yearby	yearpackedclosertogetherbytheirownattractionforeach	other.	as	we	have
seen	in	§	126,	this	condensation	necessarily	developed	heat,	a	part	of	which	was	radiated
awayasfastasproducedwhiletheremainderwasstoredupandservedtoraisethe
temperature	ofthe	sunto	what	we	findit	now.	atthe	presenttimethistemperatureis	a
chief	obstacle	to	further	shrinkage,	and	so	powerfully	opposes	the	gravitative	forces	as	to
maintainnearlyanequilibriumwiththemthuscausingaveryslowrateoffurther
condensation.	but	it	is	not	probable	that	this	was	always	so.	in	the	early	stages	of	the	sun’s
history,	when	the	temperature	was	low,	contraction	of	its	bulk	must	have	been	more	rapid,
and	attempts	have	been	made	by	the	mathematicians	to	measure	its	rate	of	progress	and	to
determine	how	long	a	time	has	been	consumed	in	the	development	of	the	present	sun	from
aprimitivenebulousconditioninwhichitfilledaspaceofgreaterdiameterthan
neptune’sorbitofcoursenumericalprecisionisnottobeexpectedinresultsofthis
kind,	but,	from	a	consideration	of	the	greatest	amount	of	heat	that	could	be	furnished	by
theshrinkageofamassequaltothatofthesunitseemsthattheperiodofthis
developmentistobe	measuredintensof	millionsorpossiblyhundredsof	millionsof
years,	but	almost	certainly	does	not	reach	a	thousand	millions.
229.	the	sun’sfuture.—the	future	duration	ofthe	sun	as	a	source	ofradiant	energyis
surely	to	be	measured	in	far	smaller	numbers	than	these.	its	career	as	a	dispenser	of	light
andheatismuch	morethanhalfspentfortheshrinkageresultsinanever-increasing
densitywhichmakesitsgaseoussubstanceapproximatemoreandmoretowardthe
behaviorofaliquidorsolidand	werecallthattheseformsof	mattercannotbyany
further	condensation	restore	the	heat	whose	loss	through	radiation	caused	them	to	contract.
theymaycontinuetoshrinkbuttheirtemperaturemustfallandwhenthesun’s
substancebecomestoodensetoobeythelawsofgaseous	matteritssurface	mustcool
rapidly	as	a	consequence	of	the	radiation	into	surrounding	space,	and	must	congeal	into	a
crust	which,	although	at	first	incandescent,	will	speedily	become	dark	and	opaque,	cutting
off	the	light	of	the	central	portions,	save	as	it	may	be	rent	from	time	to	time	by	volcanic
outburstsofthestillincandescentmassbeneathbutsuchoutburstscanbeofshort
duration	only,	and	its	final	condition	must	be	that	of	a	dark	body,	like	the	earth	or	moon,
nolongeravailableasasourceofradiantenergy.	evenbeforetheformationofasolid
crust	it	is	quite	possible	that	the	output	of	light	and	heat	may	be	seriously	diminished	by
the	formation	of	dense	vapors	completely	enshrouding	it,	as	is	now	the	case	with	jupiter
and	saturn.	it	is	believed	that	these	planets	were	formerly	incandescent,	and	at	the	present
time	are	in	a	state	of	development	through	which	the	earth	has	passed	and	toward	which
the	sun	is	moving.	according	to	newcomb,	the	future	during	which	the	sun	can	continue
to	furnish	light	and	heat	at	its	present	rate	is	not	likely	to	exceed	10,000,000	years.
this	idea	of	the	sun	as	a	developing	body	whose	present	state	is	only	temporary,	furnishes
aclewtosomeofthevexingproblemsofsolarphysicsthusthesun-spotperiodthe
distribution	of	the	spots	in	latitude,	and	the	peculiar	law	of	rotation	of	the	sun	in	different
latitudes,	may	be,	and	very	probably	are,	results	not	of	anything	now	operating	beneath	its
photospherebutofsomethingwhichhappenedtoitintheremotepast—egan
unsymmetrical	shrinkage	or	possibly	a	collision	with	some	other	body.	at	sea	the	waves
continue	to	toss	long	after	the	storm	which	produced	them	has	disappeared,	and,	according
tothe	mathematicalresearches	of	wilsing,	a	profound	agitation	ofthe	sun’s	mass	might
wellrequiretensofthousandsorevenhundredsofthousandsofyearstosubsideand
during	this	time	its	effects	would	be	visible,	like	the	waves,	as	phenomena	for	which	the
actual	condition	of	things	furnishes	no	apparent	cause.
230.	thenebularhypothesis.—thetheoryofthesun’sprogressivecontractionasa
necessaryresultofitsradiationofenergyiscomparativelymodernbutmorethana
centuryago	philosophicstudents	of	nature	had	beenledin	quitea	different	waytothe
beliefthatintheearlierstagesofitscareerthesunmusthavebeenanenormously
extended	body	whose	outer	portions	reached	even	beyond	the	orbit	of	the	remotest	planet.
laplace,	whose	speculations	upon	this	subject	have	had	a	dominant	influence	during	the
nineteenth	century,	has	left,	in	a	popular	treatise	upon	astronomy,	an	admirable	statement
of	the	phenomena	of	planetary	motion,	which	suggest	and	lead	up	to	the	nebular	theory	of
the	sun’s	development,	and	in	presenting	this	theory	we	shall	follow	substantially	his	line
of	thought,	but	with	some	freedom	of	translation	and	many	omissions.
hesays“totraceouttheprimitivesourceoftheplanetarymovementswehavethe
following	five	phenomena:	(1)	these	movements	all	take	place	in	the	same	direction	and
nearly	in	the	same	plane.	(2)	the	movements	of	the	satellites	are	in	the	same	direction	as
those	of	the	planets.	(3)	the	rotations	of	the	planets	and	the	sun	are	in	the	same	direction
asthe	orbital	motions	and	nearlyinthe	same	plane(4)	planets	and	satellites	alike	have
nearly	circular	orbits.	(5)	the	orbits	of	comets	are	wholly	unlike	these	by	reason	of	their
greateccentricitiesandinclinationstotheeclipticthatthesecoincidencesshouldbe
purely	the	result	of	chance	seemed	to	laplace	incredible,	and,	seeking	a	cause	for	them,	he
continues:	“whatever	its	nature	may	be,	since	it	has	produced	or	controlled	the	motions	of
the	planetsit	must	havereached	outto	allthese	bodiesandin	view	ofthe	prodigious
distances	which	separate	them,	the	cause	can	have	been	nothing	else	than	a	fluid	of	great
extentwhichmusthaveenvelopedthesunlikeanatmosphereaconsiderationofthe
planetary	motionsleadsustothinkthatthesun’satmosphereformerlyextendedfar
beyond	the	orbits	of	all	the	planets	and	has	shrunk	by	degrees	to	its	present	dimensions.”
thisis	not	very	differentfromtheidea	developedinfrom	aconsideration	ofthe
sun’s	radiant	energy;	butin	laplace’s	day	the	possibility	of	generating	the	sun’s	heat	by
contractionofitsbulkwasunknownandhewascompelledtoassumeaveryhigh
temperature	for	the	primitive	nebulous	sun,	while	we	now	know	that	this	is	unnecessary.
whether	the	primitive	nebula	was	hot	or	cold	the	shrinkage	would	take	place	in	much	the
samewayandwouldfinallyresultinastarorsunofveryhightemperaturebutits
development	would	be	slower	if	it	were	hot	in	the	beginning	than	if	it	were	cold.
but	again	laplace:	“how	did	the	sun’s	atmosphere	determine	the	rotations	and	revolutions
of	planets	and	satellites?	if	these	bodies	had	been	deeply	immersed	in	this	atmosphere	its
resistance	to	their	motion	would	have	made	them	fall	into	the	sun,	and	we	may	therefore
conjecturethattheplanetswereformedonebyoneattheouterlimitsofthesolar
atmosphere	by	the	condensation	of	zones	of	vapor	which	were	cast	off	in	the	plane	of	the
sun’sequatorhereheproceedstoshowbyanappealtodynamicalprinciplesthat
something	of	this	kind	must	happen,	and	that	the	matter	sloughed	off	by	the	nebula	in	the
formofaringperhapscomparabletotheringsofsaturnortheasteroidzonewould
ultimatelycondenseintoaplanetwhichinitsturnmightshrinkandcastoffringsto
produce	satellites.
pierre	simon	laplace	(1749-1827).
pierre	simon	laplace	(1749-1827).
planets	and	satellites	would	then	all	have	similar	motions,	as	noted	at	the	beginning	of	this
sectionsinceineverycasethismotionisaninheritancefromacommonsourcethe
rotation	of	the	primitive	nebula	about	its	own	axis.	“all	the	bodies	which	circle	around	a
planet	having	been	thus	formed	from	rings	which	its	atmosphere	successively	abandoned
as	rotation	became	more	and	more	rapid,	this	rotation	should	take	place	in	less	time	than	is
required	for	the	orbital	revolution	of	any	of	the	bodies	which	have	been	cast	off,	and	this
holds	true	for	the	sun	as	compared	with	the	planets.”
231.	objections	to	the	nebular	hypothesis.—in	laplace’s	time	this	slower	rate	of	motion
was	also	supposed	to	hold	true	for	saturn’s	rings	as	compared	with	the	rotation	of	saturn
itselfbutaswehaveseeninchapter	xithisringismadeupofagreatnumberof
independentparticleswhichmoveatdifferentratesofspeedandcomparingthrough
kepler’s	third	law,	the	motion	of	the	inner	edge	of	the	ring	with	the	known	periodic	time
ofthesatellites,	we	mayfindthatthese	particles	mustrotateabout	saturn	morerapidly
thantheplanetturnsuponitsaxissimilarlytheinnersatelliteofmarscompletesits
revolution	in	about	one	third	of	a	martian	day,	and	we	find	in	cases	like	this	grounds	for
objectiontothenebulartheorycomparealsolaplace’sargumentwiththepeculiar
rotations	of	uranus,	neptune,	and	their	satellites	(chapter	xi).	do	these	fortify	or	weaken
his	case?
despitetheseobjectionsandothersequallyseriousthathavebeenraisedthenebular
theory	agrees	with	the	facts	of	nature	at	so	many	points	that	astronomers	upon	the	whole
are	strongly	inclined	to	accept	its	major	outlines	as	being	at	least	an	approximation	to	the
course	of	development	actuallyfollowed	bythe	solar	system;	but	at	some	points—e.	g.,
theformationofplanetsandsatellitesthroughthecastingoffofnebulousrings—the
objections	are	so	many	and	strong	as	to	call	for	revision	and	possibly	serious	modification
of	the	theory.
one	proposed	modification,	much	discussed	in	recent	years,	consists	in	substituting	for	the
primitive	gaseousnebulaimaginedby	laplaceaverydiffusecloudof	meteoric	matter
which	in	the	course	of	its	development	would	become	transformed	into	the	gaseous	state
byrisingtemperature.	fromthis	point	of	view	much	ofthe	meteoric	duststillscattered
throughout	the	solar	system	may	be	only	the	fragments	left	over	in	fashioning	the	sun	and
planets.	chamberlin	and	moulton,	who	have	recently	given	much	attention	to	this	subject,
in	dissenting	from	some	of	laplace’s	views,	consider	that	the	primitive	nebulous	condition
must	have	been	one	in	which	the	matter	of	the	system	was	“so	brought	together	as	to	give
low	mass,	high	momentum,	and	irregular	distribution	to	the	outer	part,	and	high	mass,	low
momentumandsphericitytothecentralpartandtheysuggestapossibleoblique
collision	of	a	small	nebula	with	the	outer	parts	of	a	large	one.
232.	bode’s	law.—we	should	notleave	the	theory	of	laplace	without	noting	the	lightit
castsupon	one	pointotherwise	obscure—the	meaning	of	bode’slaw(§	134).	thislaw,
statedin	mathematicalform,	makesageometricalseriesandsimilargeometricalseries
applytothedistancesofthesatellitesofjupiterandsaturnfromtheseplanetsnow,
roche	has	shown	by	the	application	of	physical	laws	to	the	shrinkage	of	a	gaseous	body
that	its	radius	at	any	time	may	be	expressed	by	means	of	a	certain	mathematical	formula
very	similar	to	bode’s	law,	save	that	it	involves	the	amount	of	time	that	has	elapsed	since
thebeginningoftheshrinkingprocessbycomparingthisformulawiththeone
correspondingto	bode’slawhereachestheconclusionthatthepeculiarspacingofthe
planets	expressed	by	that	law	means	that	they	were	formed	at	successive	equal	intervals	of
time—i.	e.,	that	mars	is	as	much	older	than	the	earth	as	the	earth	is	older	than	venus,	etc.
the	failure	of	bode’s	law	in	the	case	of	neptune	would	then	imply	that	the	interval	of	time
between	the	formation	of	neptune	and	uranus	was	shorter	than	that	which	has	prevailed
for	the	other	planets.	but	too	much	stress	should	not	be	placed	upon	this	conclusion.	so
longasthemannerinwhichtheplanetscameintobeingcontinuesanopenquestion,
conclusions	about	their	time	of	birth	must	remain	of	doubtful	validity.
233.	tidalfrictionbetweenearthandmoon.—animportantadditiontotheoriesof
development	withinthesolarsystem	has	been	worked	out	by	prof.	g.	h.	darwin,	who,
starting	with	certain	very	simple	assumptions	as	to	the	present	condition	of	things	in	earth
and	moon,	derives	from	these,	by	a	strict	process	of	mathematical	reasoning,	far-reaching
conclusionsofgreatinterestandimportancethekeytotheseconclusionsliesin
recognitionofthefactthatthroughtheinfluenceofthetidesthereisnowin
progressandhasbeeninprogressforaverylongtimeagradualtransferofmotion
(momentof	momentumfromtheearthtothe	moontheearth’s	motionofrotationis
being	slowly	destroyed	by	the	friction	of	the	tides,	as	the	motion	of	a	bicycle	is	destroyed
by	the	friction	of	a	brake,	and,	in	consequence	of	this	slowing	down,	the	moon	is	pushed
farther	and	farther	away	from	the	earth,	so	that	it	now	moves	in	a	larger	orbit	than	it	had
some	millions	of	years	ago.
fig.	24	has	been	used	to	illustrate	the	action	of	the	moon	in	raising	tides	upon	the	earth,
but	in	accordance	with	the	third	law	of	motion	(§	36)	this	action	must	be	accompanied	by
an	equaland	contraryreaction	whose	nature	mayreadily	beseenfromthesamefigure.
the	moon	moves	about	its	orbit	from	west	to	east	and	the	earth	rotates	about	its	axis	in	the
same	direction,	as	shown	bythe	curved	arrow	inthe	figure.	thetidal	waveitherefore
points	a	little	in	advance	of	the	moon’s	position	in	its	orbit	and	by	its	attraction	must	tend
to	pull	the	moon	ahead	in	its	orbital	motion	a	little	faster	than	it	would	move	if	the	whole
substance	of	the	earth	were	placed	inside	the	sphere	represented	by	the	broken	circle	in	the
figure.	it	is	true	that	the	tidal	wave	at	i”	pulls	back	and	tends	to	neutralize	the	effect	of	the
wave	at	i,	but	on	the	whole	the	tidal	wave	nearer	the	moon	has	the	stronger	influence,	and
the	moononthe	whole	movesaverylittlefasterandbyvirtueofthisaddedimpetus
draws	continually	a	little	farther	away	from	the	earth	than	it	would	if	there	were	no	tides.
234.	consequences	of	tidal	friction	upon	the	earth.—this	process	of	moving	the	moon
awayfromtheearthisacumulativeonegoingoncenturyaftercenturyandwith
reference	to	itthe	moon’s	orbit	must	be	described	not	as	a	circle	or	ellipse,	or	any	other
curve	which	returns	into	itself,	but	as	a	spiral,	like	the	balance	spring	of	a	watch,	each	of
whosecoilsisalittlelargerthanthe	preceding	onealthoughthisexcessisto	besure,
verysmallbecausethetidesthemselvesaresmallandthetidalinfluencefeeble	when
compared	withthe	wholeattractionoftheearthforthe	moon.	butgiventimeenough,
even	this	small	force	may	accomplish	great	results,	and	something	like	100,000,000	years
of	past	opportunity	would	have	sufficed	for	the	tidal	forces	to	move	the	moon	from	close
proximity	with	the	earth	out	to	its	present	position.
for	millionsofyearstocomeif	moonandearthenduresolongthedistancebetween
them	must	go	onincreasingalthough	atan	everslowerratesincethefarther	awaythe
moon	goes	the	smaller	will	be	the	tides	and	the	slower	the	working	out	of	their	results.	on
the	other	hand,	when	the	moon	was	nearer	the	earth	than	now,	tidal	influences	must	have
been	greater	and	their	effects	more	rapidly	produced	than	at	the	present	time,	particularly
ifasseems	probableatsome	pastepochthe	earth	was	hotand	plasticlikejupiterand
saturn.	theninsteadoftidesinthe	wateroftheseasuchas	we	now	havethe	whole
substance	of	the	earth	would	respond	to	the	moon’s	attraction	in	bodily	tides	of	semi-fluid
matternotonlyhigherbutwithgreaterinternalfrictionoftheirmoleculesoneupon
another,	and	correspondingly	greater	effect	in	checking	the	earth’s	rotation.
but,	whether	the	tide	be	a	bodily	one	or	confined	to	the	waters	of	the	sea,	so	long	as	the
moon	causes	it	to	flow	there	will	be	a	certain	amount	of	friction	which	will	affect	the	earth
much	as	a	brake	affects	a	revolving	wheel,	slowing	down	its	motion,	and	producing	thus	a
longerdayaswellasalongermonthonaccountofthemoon’sincreaseddistance.
slowing	down	the	earth’s	rotation	is	the	direct	action	of	the	moon	upon	the	earth.	pushing
the	moonawayistheforminwhichtheearth’sequalandcontraryreaction	manifests
itself.
235.	consequences	oftidalfriction	upon	the	moon.—whenthe	moon	was	plasticthe
earth	must	haveraisedinita	bodilytide	manifold	greaterthanthelunartides	uponthe
earth,	and,	as	we	have	seen	in	chapter	ix,	this	tide	has	long	since	worn	out	the	greater	part
ofthemoon’srotationandbroughtoursatellitetotheconditioninwhichitpresents
always	the	same	face	toward	the	earth.
these	two	processes,	slowing	down	the	rotation	and	pushing	away	the	disturbing	body,	are
inseparable—one	requires	the	other;	and	it	is	worth	noting	in	this	connection	that	when	for
any	reason	the	tide	ceases	to	flow,	and	the	tidal	wave	takes	up	a	permanent	position,	as	it
has	in	the	moon	(§	99),	its	work	is	ended,	for	when	there	is	no	motion	of	the	wave	there
can	be	no	friction	to	further	reduce	the	rate	of	rotation	of	the	one	body,	and	no	reaction	to
thatfrictionto	push	awaythe	other.	butthis	permanent	and	stationarytidal	waveinthe
moonorelsewheremeansthatthesatellitepresentsalwaysthesamefacetowardits
planet,	moving	once	about	its	orbit	in	the	time	required	for	one	revolution	upon	its	axis,
and	the	tide	raised	by	the	moon	upon	the	earth	tends	to	produce	here	the	result	long	since
achieved	in	our	satellite,	to	make	our	day	and	month	of	equal	length,	and	to	make	the	earth
turn	always	the	same	side	toward	the	moon.	but	the	moon’s	tidal	force	is	small	compared
with	that	ofthe	earth,	and	has	a	vastly	greater	momentum	to	overcome,	so	thatits	work
upontheearthisnotyetcomplete.	accordingto	thomsonand	taitthe	moon	mustbe
pushed	off	another	hundred	thousand	miles,	and	the	day	lengthened	out	by	tidal	influence
tosevenofourpresentweeksbeforethedayandthelunarmontharemadeofequal
length,	and	the	moon	thereby	permanently	hidden	from	one	hemisphere	of	the	earth.
236.	the	earth-moon	system.—retracing	into	the	past	the	course	of	development	of	the
earth	and	moon,	it	is	possible	to	reach	back	by	means	of	the	mathematical	theory	of	tidal
friction	to	atime	at	which	these	bodies	were	much	nearerto	each	otherthan	now,	butit
has	not	been	found	possible	to	trace	out	the	mode	of	their	separation	from	one	body	into
two,	as	is	supposed	in	the	nebular	theory.	in	the	earliest	part	of	their	history	accessible	to
mathematicalanalysistheyaredistinctbodiesatsomeconsiderabledistancefromeach
other,	with	the	earth	rotating	about	an	axis	more	nearly	perpendicular	to	the	moon’s	orbit
andtothe	eclipticthanis	nowthe	case.	startingfrom	such	a	conditionthelunartides,
accordingto	darwinhave	beeninstrumentalintippingtheearth’srotationaxisintoits
present	oblique	positionandin	determiningthe	eccentricity	ofthe	moon’s	orbitandits
position	with	respect	to	the	ecliptic	as	well	as	the	present	length	of	day	and	month.
237.	tidalfrictionupontheplanets.—thesatellitesoftheouterplanetsareequally
subject	to	influences	of	this	kind,	and	there	appears	to	be	independent	evidence	that	some
of	them,	at	least,	turn	always	the	same	face	toward	their	respective	planets,	indicating	that
the	work	of	tidal	friction	has	here	been	accomplished.	we	saw	in	chapter	xi	that	it	is	at
presentanopenquestion	whethertheinnerplanets,	venusand	mercurydonotalways
turn	the	same	face	toward	the	sun,	their	day	and	year	being	of	equal	length.	in	addition	to
the	direct	observational	evidence	uponthis	point,	schiaparelli	has	soughtto	show	by	an
appealtotidaltheory	that	such	is	probably	the	case,	atleast	for	mercury,	since	the	tidal
forces	which	tend	to	bring	about	this	result	in	that	planet	are	about	as	great	as	the	forces
which	have	certainly	produceditinthe	case	ofthe	moon	and	saturn’s	satellite,	japetus.
thesamelineofreasoningwouldshowthateverysatelliteinthesolarsystemsave
possiblythenewlydiscoveredninthsatelliteofsaturn,	mustasaconsequenceoftidal
friction,	turn	always	the	same	face	toward	its	planet.
238.	the	solar	tide.—the	sun	also	raisestidesinthe	earth,	and	theirinfluence	must	be
similarincharactertothatofthelunartidescheckingtherotationoftheearthand
thrustingearthandsunapartalthoughquantitativelytheseeffectsaresmallcompared
withthoseofthemoontheymusthowevercontinuesolongasthesolartidelasts,
possibly	untilthe	day	and	year	are	made	of	equallength—i.	ethey	may	continuelong
after	the	lunar	tidal	influence	has	ceased	to	push	earth	and	moon	apart.	should	this	be	the
case,	a	curious	inverse	effect	will	be	produced.	the	day	being	then	longer	than	the	month,
the	moon	will	againraise	atideinthe	earth	which	willrun	arounditfrom	westto	east,
oppositetothe	course	ofthe	presenttidethustendingto	acceleratethe	earth’srotation,
and	by	its	reaction	to	bring	the	moon	back	toward	the	earth	again,	and	ultimately	to	fall
upon	it.
we	may	notethataneffectofthis	kind	must	bein	progress	now	between	marsandits
inner	satellite,	phobos,	whose	time	of	orbital	revolution	is	only	one	third	of	a	martian	day.
it	seems	probable	that	this	satellite	is	in	the	last	stages	of	its	existence	as	an	independent
body,	and	must	ultimately	fall	into	mars.
239.	roche’s	limit.—in	looking	forward	to	such	a	catastrophe,	however,	due	regard	must
bepaidtoadynamicalprincipleofadifferentcharacterthemooncanneverbe
precipitated	upon	the	earth	entire,	since	before	it	reaches	us	it	will	have	been	torn	asunder
bythe	excess	ofthe	earth’s	attractionforthe	nearside	ofitssatellite	overthat	whichit
exertsuponthefarside.	astheresultof	roche’s	mathematicalanalysis	weareableto
assign	a	limiting	distance	between	any	planet	and	its	satellite	within	which	the	satellite,	if
it	turns	always	the	same	face	toward	the	planet,	can	not	come	without	being	broken	into
fragmentsifwerepresenttheradiusoftheplanetbyrandthequotientobtainedby
dividing	the	density	of	the	planet	by	the	density	of	the	satellite	by	q,	then
roche’s	limit	=	2.44	r	∛	q.
thus	in	the	case	of	earth	and	moon	we	find	from	the	densities	given	in	§	95,	q	=	1.65,	and
withr3,963	milesweobtain11,400	milesasthenearestapproach	whichthe	moon
could	make	to	the	earth	without	being	broken	up	by	the	difference	of	the	earth’s	attractions
for	its	opposite	sides.
we	must	observe,	howeverthat	roche’slimittakes	no	account	of	molecularforcesthe
adhesion	of	one	molecule	to	another,	by	virtue	of	which	a	stick	or	stone	resists	fracture,
butisconcernedonlywiththegravitativeforcesbywhichthe	moleculesareattracted
towardthe	moon’s	center	andtowardthe	earth.	within	a	stone	orrock	of	moderate	size
these	gravitative	forces	are	insignificant,	and	cohesion	is	the	chief	factor	in	preserving	its
integritybutinalargebodylikethe	moonthecaseisjustreversedcohesionplaysa
smallpartandgravitationalargeoneinholdingthebodytogether.	we	mayconclude,
thereforethat	at	a	proper	distancethese	forces	are	capable	of	breaking	upthe	moon,	or
anyotherlargebodyintofragmentsofasizesuchthat	molecularcohesioninsteadof
gravitation	is	the	chief	agent	in	preserving	them	from	further	disintegration.
240.	saturn’s	rings.—saturn’s	rings	are	of	peculiar	interest	in	this	connection.	the	outer
edgeoftheringsystemliesjustinsideofroche’slimitforthisplanetandwehave
alreadyseenthattheringsarecomposed	ofsmallfragmentsindependent	of	each	other.
whatever	mayhavebeentheprocessby	whichtheninesatellitesofsaturncameinto
existence,	we	have	in	roche’s	limit	the	explanation	why	the	material	of	the	ring	was	not
workedupintosatellitestheforcesexertedbysaturnwouldtearintopiecesany
considerablesatellitethusformed	and	equally	would	preventtheformation	of	onefrom
raw	material.
saturn’s	rings	present	the	only	case	within	the	solar	system	where	matter	is	known	to	be
revolvingaboutaplanetatadistancelessthanroche’slimitanditisaninteresting
question	whether	these	rings	can	remain	as	a	permanent	part	of	the	planet’s	system	or	are
only	atemporaryfeature.	the	drawings	of	saturn	madetwo	centuries	ago	agree	among
themselvesinrepresentingtheringsaslargerthantheynowappearandthereissome
reasontosupposethatasaconsequenceofmutualdisturbances—collisions—their
momentumisbeingslowly	wastedsothatultimatelythey	mustbeprecipitatedintothe
planet.	but	the	direct	evidence	of	such	a	progress	that	can	be	drawn	from	present	data	is
too	scanty	to	justify	positive	conclusions	in	the	matter.	on	the	other	hand,	nolan	suggests
thatinthe	outer	parts	ofthering	smallsatellites	might	beformed	whosetidalinfluence
upon	saturn	wouldsufficeto	pushthem	awayfromthering	beyond	roche’slimitand
that	the	very	small	inner	satellites	of	saturn	may	have	been	thus	formed	at	the	expense	of
the	ring.
the	inner	satellite	of	mars	is	very	close	to	roche’s	limit	for	that	planet,	and,	as	we	have
seen	above,	must	be	approaching	still	nearer	to	the	danger	line.
241.	the	moon’s	development.—thefineseriesofphotographsofthe	moonobtained
within	the	last	few	years	at	paris,	have	been	used	by	the	astronomers	of	that	observatory
fora	minutestudy	ofthelunarformations,	muchasgeologistsstudythesurfaceofthe
earth	to	determine	something	about	the	manner	in	which	it	was	formed.	their	conclusions
areingeneralthatatsomepasttimethe	moon	wasahotandfluidbody	whichasit
cooled	and	condensed,	formed	a	solid	crust	whose	further	shrinkage	compressed	the	liquid
nucleusandledtoalongseriesoffracturesinthecrustand	outburstsofliquid	matter,
whose	latest	and	feeblest	stages	produced	the	lunar	craters,	while	traces	of	the	earlier	ones,
connectedwithageneralsettlingofthecrustalthoughnearlyobliteratedarestill
preservedincertainlargebutvaguefeaturesofthelunartopographysuchasthe
distribution	ofthe	seas,	etc.	they	find	alsoin	certain	markings	ofthe	surface	whatthey
consider	convincing	evidence	of	the	existence	in	past	times	of	a	lunar	atmosphere.	but	this
seemsdoubtfulsincetheforceofgravityatthemoon’ssurfaceissosmallthatan
atmospheresimilartothatoftheeartheventhoughplaceduponthemooncouldnot
permanentlyendurebutwouldbelostbythegradualescapeofits	moleculesintothe
surrounding	space.
the	molecules	of	a	gas	are	quite	independent	one	of	another,	and	are	in	a	state	of	ceaseless
agitation,	each	one	darting	to	and	fro,	colliding	withits	neighbors	or	with	whatever	else
opposes	its	forward	motion,	and	traveling	with	velocities	which,	on	the	average,	amount	to
a	good	many	hundreds	of	feet	per	second,	although	in	the	case	of	any	individual	molecule
they	may	be	muchless	or	much	greaterthanthe	average	valuean	occasional	molecule
having	possibly	a	velocity	severaltimes	as	great	asthe	averageinthe	upperregions	of
our	own	atmosphere,	if	one	of	these	swiftly	moving	particles	of	oxygen	or	nitrogen	were
headed	away	from	the	earth	with	a	velocity	of	seven	miles	per	second,	the	whole	attractive
power	of	the	earth	would	be	insufficient	to	check	its	motion,	and	it	would	therefore,	unless
stoppedbysomecollisionescapefromtheearthandreturnnomorebutsincethis
velocityofsevenmilespersecondismorethanthirtytimesasgreatastheaverage
velocity	of	the	molecules	of	air,	it	must	be	very	seldom	indeed	that	one	is	found	to	move
so	swiftly,	andtheloss	ofthe	earth’s	atmosphere	byleakage	ofthis	sortisinsignificant.
but	upon	the	moon,	or	any	other	body	where	the	force	of	gravity	is	small,	conditions	are
quite	different,	and	in	our	satellite	a	velocity	of	little	more	than	one	mile	per	second	would
sufficetocarrya	moleculeawayfromthe	outerlimitsofitsatmosphere.	thisvelocity,
onlyfivetimestheaveragewouldbefrequentlyattainedparticularlyinformertimes
when	the	moon’s	temperature	was	high,	for	then	the	average	velocity	of	all	the	molecules
would	be	considerably	increased,	and	the	amount	of	leakage	might	become,	and	probably
wouldbecomeaserious	mattersteadilydepletingthe	moon’satmosphereandleading
finally	to	its	present	state	of	exhaustion.	it	is	possible	that	the	moon	may	at	one	time	have
had	an	atmosphere,	but	if	so	it	could	have	been	only	a	temporary	possession,	and	the	same
line	of	reasoning	may	be	applied	to	the	asteroids	and	to	most	of	the	satellites	of	the	solar
system,	and	also,	though	in	less	degree,	to	the	smaller	planets,	mercury	and	marsstellardevelopment.—wehavealreadyconsideredinthischapterthelineof
developmentfollowedbyonestarthesunandtreatingthisasatypicalcaseitis
commonlybelievedthatthelifehistoryofastarinsofarasitlieswithinourreach,
begins	with	a	conditionin	whichits	matteris	widely	diffused,	and	presumably	at	alow
temperaturecontractinginbulkundertheinfluenceofitsowngravitativeforcesthe
star’stemperaturerisestoa	maximumandthenfallsoffinlaterstagesuntilthebody
ceasestoshineandpassesovertothelistofdarkstarswhoseexistencecanonlybe
detectedinexceptionalcasessuchasarenotedinchapter	xiiithemostsystematic
development	of	this	idea	is	due	to	lockyer,	who	looks	upon	all	the	celestial	bodies—sun,
moon	and	planets,	stars,	nebulæ,	and	comets—as	being	only	collections	of	meteoric	matter
indifferentstagesofdevelopmentandwhohassoughtbymeansoftheirspectrato
classify	these	bodies	and	to	determine	their	stage	of	advancement.	while	the	fundamental
ideas	involved	in	this	“meteoritic	hypothesis”	are	not	seriously	controverted,	the	detailed
applicationofitsprinciplesisopentomorequestionandforthemostpartthose
astronomers	who	hold	that	in	the	present	state	of	knowledge	stellar	spectra	furnish	a	key	to
a	star’s	age	or	degree	of	advancement	do	not	venture	beyond	broad	general	statements.
fig.	151.—types	of	stellar	spectra	substantially	according	to	secchi.
fig.	151.—types	of	stellar	spectra	substantially	according	to	secchi.
243.	stellar	spectra.—thus	the	types	of	stellar	spectra	shown	in	fig.	151	are	supposed	to
illustrate	successive	stagesinthe	development	of	an	average	star.	type	i	correspondsto
the	period	in	which	its	temperature	is	near	the	maximum;	type	ii	belongs	to	a	later	stage
in	which	the	temperature	has	commenced	to	fall;	and	type	iii	to	the	period	immediately
preceding	extinction.
while	human	life,	or	even	the	duration	of	the	human	race,	is	too	short	to	permit	a	single
startobefollowedthroughallthestagesofitscareeranadequatepictureofthat
developmentmightbeobtainedbyexaminingmanystarseachatadifferentstageof
progressandfollowingthisideanumeroussubdivisionsofthetypesofstellarspectra
shown	in	fig.	151	have	been	proposed	in	order	to	represent	with	more	detail	the	process	of
stellar	growth	and	decay;	but	for	the	most	part	these	subdivisions	and	their	interpretation
are	accepted	by	astronomers	with	much	reserve.
it	is	significant	that	there	are	comparatively	few	stars	with	spectra	of	type	iii,	for	this	is
what	we	should	expectto	findifthe	development	of	a	starthroughthelast	stages	ofits
visible	career	occupied	but	a	small	fraction	of	its	total	life.	from	the	same	point	of	view
the	great	number	of	stars	with	spectra	of	the	firsttype	would	point	to	a	long	duration	of
this	stage	of	life.	the	period	in	which	the	sun	belongs,	represented	by	type	ii,	probably
has	a	duration	intermediate	between	the	others.	since	most	of	the	variable	stars,	save	those
ofthe	algolclasshavespectraofthethirdtype,	weconcludethatvariability,	withits
associated	ruddy	color	and	great	atmospheric	absorption	of	light,	is	a	sign	of	old	age	and
approaching	extinction.	the	algol	or	eclipse	variables,	on	the	other	hand,	having	spectra
ofthefirsttypearecomparativelyyoungstarsandasweshallseealittlelaterthe
shortness	of	their	light	periods	in	some	measure	confirms	this	conclusion	drawn	from	their
spectra.
we	have	noted	in	§	196	that	the	sun’s	near	neighbors	are	prevailingly	stars	with	spectra	of
the	second	type,	while	the	milky	way	is	mainly	composed	of	first-type	stars,	and	from	this
we	may	now	conclude	that	in	our	particular	part	of	the	entire	celestial	space	the	stars	are,
as	a	rule,	somewhat	further	developed	than	is	the	case	elsewhere.
244.	double	stars.—the	double	stars	present	special	problems	of	development	growing
out	ofthe	effects	oftidalfriction,	which	must	operateinthem	much	asit	does	between
earth	and	moon,	tending	steadily	to	increase	the	distance	between	the	components	of	such
a	star.	so,	too,	in	such	a	system	as	is	shown	in	fig.	132,	gravity	must	tend	to	make	each
component	of	the	double	star	shrink	to	smaller	dimensions,	and	this	shrinkage	must	result
infasterrotationandincreasedtidalfrictionwhichinturn	mustpushthecomponents
apart,	so	that	in	view	of	the	small	density	and	close	proximity	of	those	particular	stars	we
may	fairly	regard	a	star	like	β	lyræ	as	in	the	early	stages	of	its	career	and	destined	with
increasing	age	to	lose	its	variability	of	light,	since	the	eclipses	which	now	take	place	must
cease	with	increasing	distance	between	the	components	unless	the	orbit	is	turned	exactly
edgewise	toward	the	earth.	close	proximity	and	the	resulting	shortness	of	periodic	time	in
adoublestarseemthereforetobeevidenceofitsyouthandsincethisshortnessof
periodic	time	is	characteristic	of	both	algol	variables	and	spectroscopic	binaries	as	a	class,
we	may	set	them	down	as	being,	upon	the	whole,	stars	in	the	early	stages	of	their	career.
on	the	other	hand,	it	is	generally	true	that	the	larger	the	orbit,	and	the	greater	the	periodic
time	in	the	orbit,	the	farther	is	the	star	advanced	in	its	development.
in	his	theory	of	tidal	friction,	darwin	has	pointed	out	that	whenever	the	periodic	time	in
the	orbitis	morethantwice	aslong	asthetimerequiredforrotation	aboutthe	axisthe
effect	of	the	tides	is	to	increase	the	eccentricity	of	the	orbit,	and,	following	this	indication,
see	has	urged	that	with	increasing	distance	between	the	components	of	a	double	star	their
orbits	about	the	common	center	of	gravity	must	grow	more	and	more	eccentric,	so	that	we
have	in	the	shape	of	such	orbits	a	new	index	of	stellar	development;	the	more	eccentric	the
orbitthefartheradvancedarethestarsitisimportanttonoteinthisconnectionthat
among	the	double	stars	whose	orbits	have	been	computed	there	seems	to	run	a	general	rule
—the	larger	the	orbit	the	greater	is	its	eccentricity—a	relation	which	must	hold	true	if	tidal
frictionoperatesasabovesupposedandwhichbeingfoundtoholdtrueconfirmsin
some	degree	the	criteria	of	stellar	age	which	are	furnished	by	the	theory	of	tidal	friction.
245.	nebulæ.—the	nebular	hypothesis	of	laplace	has	inclined	astronomers	to	look	upon
nebulæ	in	general	as	material	destined	to	be	worked	up	into	stars,	but	which	is	now	in	a
verycrudeandundevelopedstagetheirgreatbulkandsmalldensityseemalsoto
indicate	that	gravitation	has	not	yet	produced	in	them	results	at	all	comparable	with	what
we	see	in	sun	and	stars.	but	even	among	nebulæ	there	are	to	be	found	very	different	stages
ofdevelopmenttheirregularnebulashapelessandvoidlikethatof	orionthespiral,
ring,	and	planetary	nebulæ	and	the	star	cluster,	clearly	differ	in	amount	of	progress	toward
their	final	goal.	but	it	is	by	no	means	sure	that	these	several	types	are	different	stages	in
one	line	of	development;	for	example,	the	primitive	nebula	which	grows	into	a	spiral	may
neverbecomearingorplanetarynebulaandviceversasotoothereisnoreasonto
supposethatastarclusterwilleverbreakupintoisolatedstarssuchasthosewhose
relation	to	each	other	is	shown	in	figclassification.—consideringtheheavenlybodieswithrespecttotheirstageof
development,	and	arrangingthem	in	due	order,	we	should	probably	findlowest	down	in
the	scale	of	progress	the	irregular	nebulæ	of	chaotic	appearance	such	as	that	represented	in
fig.	146.	above	these	in	point	of	development	stand	the	spiral,	ring,	and	planetary	nebulæ,
although	the	exact	sequence	in	which	they	should	be	arranged	remains	a	matter	of	doubt.
still	higher	up	in	the	scale	are	star	clusters	whose	individual	members,	as	well	as	isolated
stars,	are	to	be	classified	by	means	of	their	spectra,	as	shown	in	fig.	151,	where	the	order
of	development	of	each	staris	probably	from	type	ithrough	iiinto	iii	and	beyondto
extinction	of	its	light	and	the	cutting	off	of	most	of	its	radiant	energy.	jupiter	and	saturn
are	to	be	regarded	as	stars	which	have	recently	entered	this	dark	stage.	the	earth	is	further
developed	than	these,	but	it	is	not	so	far	along	as	are	mars	and	mercury;	while	the	moon	is
to	be	looked	upon	as	the	most	advanced	heavenly	body	accessible	to	our	research,	having
reached	a	state	of	decrepitude	which	may	almost	be	called	death—a	stage	typical	of	that
toward	which	all	the	others	are	moving.
meteors	and	comets	are	to	be	regarded	as	fragments	of	celestial	matter,	chips,	too	small	to
achieve	by	themselves	much	progress	along	the	normal	lines	of	development,	but	destined
sooner	or	later,	by	collision	with	some	larger	body,	to	share	thenceforth	in	its	fortunesstabilityoftheuniverse.—itwasconsideredagreatachievementinthe
mathematicalastronomyofacenturyagowhenlaplaceshowedthatthemutual
attractions	of	sun	and	planets	might	indeed	produce	endless	perturbations	in	the	motions
andpositionsofthesebodiesbutcouldneverbringaboutcollisionsamongthemor
greatlyaltertheirexistingorbitsbutintheproofofthisgreattheoremtwoinfluences
were	neglected,	either	of	which	is	fatal	to	its	validity.	one	of	these—tidal	friction—as	we
have	already	seentendsto	wreckthe	systems	of	satellites,	andthe	same	effect	must	be
producedupontheplanetsbyanyotherinfluencewhichtendstoimpedetheirorbital
motionitistheinertiaoftheplanetinitsforwardmovementthatbalancesthesun’s
attraction,	and	any	diminution	ofthe	planet’s	velocity	will	givethis	attractionthe	upper
handand	mustultimatelyprecipitatetheplanetintothesunthe	meteoric	matter	with
which	the	earth	comes	ceaselessly	into	collision	must	have	just	this	influence,	although	its
effects	are	very	small,	and	something	of	the	same	kind	may	come	from	the	medium	which
transmits	radiant	energy	through	the	interstellar	spaces.
itseemsincrediblethattheluminiferousether,	whichissupposedtopervadeallspace,
should	present	absolutely	no	resistance	to	the	motion	of	stars	and	planets	rushing	through
itwithvelocitieswhichinmanycasesexceedmilesperhourifthereisa
resistance	to	this	motion,	however	small,	we	may	extend	to	the	whole	visible	universe	the
words	of	thomson	and	tait,	who	say	in	their	great	treatise	on	natural	philosophy,	“we
have	no	data	in	the	present	state	of	science	for	estimating	the	relative	importance	of	tidal
friction	and	of	the	resistance	ofthe	resisting	medium	through	which	the	earth	and	moon
move;	but,	whatever	it	may	be,	there	can	be	but	one	ultimate	result	for	such	a	system	as
thatofthesunandplanetsifcontinuinglongenoughunderexistinglawsandnot
disturbed	by	meeting	with	other	moving	masses	in	space.	that	result	is	the	falling	together
ofallintoone	mass,	whichalthoughrotatingforatime,	mustintheendcometorest
relatively	to	the	surrounding	medium.”
compare	with	this	the	words	of	a	great	poet	who	in	the	tempest	puts	into	the	mouth	of
prospero	the	lines:
“the	cloud-capp’d	towers,	the	gorgeous	palaces,
the	solemn	temples,	the	great	globe	itself,
yea,	all	which	it	inherit,	shall	dissolve;
and,	like	this	insubstantial	pageant	faded,
leave	not	a	rack	behind.”
248.	the	future.—in	spite	of	statements	like	these,	it	lies	beyond	the	scope	of	scientific
researchtoaffirmthatthevisibleorderofthingswillevercometonaughtandthe
outcome	of	present	tendencies,	as	sketched	above,	may	be	profoundly	modified	in	ages	to
come,	by	influences	of	which	we	are	now	ignorant.	we	have	already	noted	that	the	farther
ourspeculation	extendsinto	either	past	orfuturethe	moreinsecure	areitsconclusions,
andtheremoterconsequencesofpresentlawsaretobeaccepted	withacorresponding
reserve.	but	the	one	great	fact	which	stands	out	clear	in	this	connection	is	that	of	change.
the	old	concept	of	a	universe	created	in	finished	form	and	destined	soto	abide	untilits
final	dissolution,	has	passed	away	from	scientificthought	andisreplaced	bytheidea	of
slowdevelopmentauniversewhichiseverbecomingsomethingelseandisnever
finished,	as	shadowed	forth	by	goethe	in	the	lines:
“thus	work	i	at	the	roaring	loom	of	time,
and	weave	for	deity	a	living	robe	sublime.”
footnotes
[a]	the	circle	and	straight	line	are	considered	to	be	special	cases	of	these	curves,	which,	taken
collectively,	are	called	the	conic	sections.
[b]	aristophanes,	the	clouds,	whewell’s	translation.
[c]	schiaparelli,	osservazioni	sulle	stelle	doppie.
appendix
the	greek	alphabet
the	greek	letters	are	so	much	used	by	astronomers	in	connection	with	the	names	of	the
stars,	and	for	other	purposes,	that	the	greek	alphabet	is	printed	below—not	necessarily	to
be	learned,	but	for	convenient	reference:
greeknameenglishalphaabetabgammagdeltadε	orepsilonzetazetaϑ	orthetathiotaikappaklambdalmumnunxixomicronpiprhorσ	orsigmastautupsilonuphiphchichpsipsomegaō
popular	literature	of	astronomy
the	following	brief	bibliography,	while	making	no	pretense	at	completeness,	may	serve	as
a	useful	guide	to	supplementary	reading:
general	treatises
young.	general	astronomy.	an	admirable	general	survey	of	the	entire	field.
newcomb.	popular	astronomy.	the	second	edition	of	a	german	translation	of	this	work	by
engelmann	and	vogel	is	especially	valuable.
ball.	story	of	the	heavens.	somewhat	easier	reading	than	either	of	the	preceding.
chambers.	descriptive	astronomy.	an	elaborate	but	elementary	work	in	three	volumes.
langley.	thenewastronomytreatsmainlyofthephysicalconditionofthecelestial
bodies.
proctor	and	ranyard.	old	and	new	astronomy.
special	treatises
proctor.	the	moon.	a	general	treatment	of	the	subject.
nasmyth	and	carpenter.	the	moon.	an	admirably	illustrated	but	expensive	work	dealing
mainly	with	the	topography	and	physical	conditions	of	the	moon.	there	is	a	cheaper	and
very	good	edition	in	german.
young.	the	sun.	international	scientific	series.	the	most	recent	and	authoritative	treatise
on	this	subject.
proctor.	other	worlds	than	ours.	an	account	of	planets,	comets,	etc.
newton.	meteor.	encyclopædia	britannica.
airy.	gravitation.	a	non-mathematical	exposition	of	the	laws	of	planetary	motion.
stokes.	on	light	as	a	means	of	investigation.	burnett	lectures.	ii.	the	basis	of	spectrum
analysis.
schellen.	spectrum	analysis.
thomson	(sir	w.,	lord	kelvin),	popular	lectures,	etc.	lectures	onthe	tides,	the	sun’s
heat,	etc.
ball.	time	and	tide.	an	exposition	of	the	researches	of	g.	h.	darwin	upon	tidal	friction.
gore.	the	visible	universe.	deals	with	a	class	of	problems	inadequately	treated	in	most
popular	astronomies.
darwin.	the	tides.	an	admirable	elementary	exposition.
clerke.	the	system	of	the	stars.	stellar	astronomy.
newcomb.	chapters	on	the	stars,	in	popular	science	monthly	for	1900.
clerke.	history	of	astronomy	during	the	nineteenth	century.	an	admirable	work.
wolf.	geschichte	der	astronomie.	münchen,	1877.	an	excellent	german	work.
a	list	of	stars	for	time	observations
see	§	20.
namemagnituderight	ascensiondeclinationhm°			
β	ceti-18.5
η	ceti-10.7
α	ceti+3.7
γ	eridani-13.8
aldebaran	
rigel-8.3
κ	orionis-9.7
β	canis	majoris-17.9
sirius-16.6
procyon	
α	hydr-8.2
regulus+12.5
ν	hydr-15.7
ϵ	corvi-22.1
γ	corvi	
spica-10.6
ζ	virginis-0.1
α	libr-15.6
β	libr-9.0
antares	
α	ophiuchi+12.6
ϵ	sagittarii-34.4
δ	aquil+2.9
altair+8.6
β	aquarii	
α	aquarii-0.8
fomalhaut-30.2
index
the	references	are	to	section	numbers.
absorption	of	starlight,	225.
absorption	spectra,	87.
accelerating	force,	35.
adjustment	of	observations,	2.
albedo	of	moon,	97.
of	venus,	148.
algol,	205.
altitudes,	4,	21.
andromeda	nebula,	214.
angles,	measurement	of,	2.
angular	diameter,	7.
annular	eclipse,	64.
asteroids,	156.
atmosphere	of	the	earth,	49.
of	the	moon,	103.
of	jupiter,	139.
of	mars,	153.
aurora,	51.
azimuth,	5,	21.
	
biela’s	comet,	181.
bode’s	law,	134,	232.
bredichin’s	theory	of	comet	tails,	180.
	
calendar,	o.	s.	and	n.	s.,	61.
capture	of	comets	and	meteors,	176.
canals	of	mars,	154.
celestial	mechanics,	32.
changes	upon	the	moon,	108.
chemical	constitution	of	sun,	116.
of	stars,	210.
chromosphere,	the	sun’s,	124.
chronology,	59.
classification	of	stars,	212.
clocks	and	watches,	74.
sidereal	clock,	12.
collisions	with	comets,	183.
colors	of	stars,	209.
comets,	general	characteristics,	158-164.
development	of,	179,	181.
groups,	177.
orbits,	161.
periodic,	176.
spectra,	182.
tails,	180.
comets	and	meteors,	relation	of,	175.
conic	sections,	38.
constellations,	184.
corona,	the	sun’s,	123.
craters,	lunar,	105.
	
dark	stars,	201.
day,	52,	62.
declination,	21.
development	of	comet,	179.
of	moon,	241.
of	nebulæ,	245.
of	stars,	242,	244.
of	sun,	228.
of	universe,	226.
distribution	of	stars	and	nebulæ,	220.
diurnal	motion,	10,	15.
doppler	principle,	89.
double	nebulæ,	215.
double	stars,	198.
development	of,	244.
driving	clock,	80.
	
earth,	atmosphere,	48.
mass,	45.
size	and	shape,	44.
warming	of	the	earth,	47.
eclipses,	nature	of,	63.
annular	eclipse,	64.
eclipse	limits,	68.
eclipse	maps,	70,	71.
number	of,	in	a	year,	69.
partial	eclipse,	64.
prediction	of,	70,	71.
recurrence	of,	72.
shadow	cone,	64,	66.
total	eclipse,	64.
uses	of,	73.
eclipses	of	jupiter’s	satellites,	141.
eclipse	theory	of	variable	stars,	205.
ecliptic,	26.
obliquity	of,	25.
ellipse,	33.
epochs	for	planetary	motion,	30.
energy,	radiant,	75.
condensation	of,	76.
epicycle,	32.
equation	of	time,	53.
equator,	16,	21.
equatorial	mounting,	80.
equinoxes,	25.
ether,	75.
evening	star,	31.
	
faculæ,	122.
falling	bodies,	law	of,	35.
finding	the	stars,	14.
fraunhofer	lines,	87.
	
galaxy,	219.
geography	of	the	sky,	16.
graphical	representation,	6.
grating,	diffraction,	84.
gravitation,	law	of,	37.
	
harvest	moon,	93.
heat	of	the	sun,	118,	126.
helmholtz,	contraction	theory	of	the	sun,	126,	228.
horizon,	4,	21.
hour	angle,	21.
hour	circle,	21.
hyperbola,	38.
	
japetus,	satellite	of	saturn,	145.
jupiter,	136.
atmosphere,	139.
belts,	137.
invisible	from	fixed	stars,	197.
orbit	of,	29.
physical	condition,	139.
rotation	and	flattening,	138.
satellites,	140.
surface	markings,	137.
	
kepler’s	laws,	33,	111.
	
latitude,	determination	of,	18.
leap	year,	61.
lenses,	77.
leonid	meteor	shower,	172.
perturbations	of,	174.
librations	of	moon,	98.
life	upon	the	planets,	157.
light	curves,	205.
light,	nature	of,	75.
light	year,	190.
limits	of	eclipses,	68.
longitude,	56.
determination	of,	58.
lunation,	60.
	
magnifying	power	of	telescope,	79.
magnitude,	stellar,	9,	186.
mars,	atmosphere,	temperature,	150.
canals,	154.
orbit,	30.
polar	caps,	152.
rotation,	151.
satellites,	155.
surface	markings,	150.
mass,	determination	of,	37.
of	comets,	164.
of	double	stars,	200.
of	moon,	94.
of	planets,	40,	133.
measurements,	accurate,	1.
mercury,	149.
motion	of	its	perihelion,	43.
orbit	of,	30.
meridian,	19,	21.
meteors,	nature	of,	165,	169.
number	of,	167.
velocity,	170.
meteors	and	comets,	relation	of,	175.
meteor	showers,	radiant,	171.
leonids,	capture	of,	172,	173.
perturbations,	174.
milky	way,	219.
mira,	ο	ceti,	204.
mirrors,	77.
month,	60.
moon,	91.
albedo,	97.
atmosphere,	103.
changes	in,	108.
density,	surface	gravity,	95.
development	of,	241.
harvest	moon,	93.
influence	upon	the	earth,	109,	233.
librations,	98.
map	of,	101.
mass	and	size,	94.
motion,	24,	92.
mountains	and	craters,	104.
phases,	91,	92.
physical	condition,	100,	107.
month,	60.
morning	star,	31.
motion	in	line	of	sight,	89,	193.
multiple	stars,	202.
	
names	of	stars,	8.
nebulæ,	214.
density,	217.
development	of,	245.
motion,	218.
spectra,	216.
types	and	classes	of,	215.
nebular	hypothesis,	230.
objections	to,	231.
neptune,	146.
discovery	of,	41.
newton’s	laws	of	motion,	34.
law	of	gravitation,	37,	43.
nodes,	39.
relation	to	eclipses,	67,	71.
nucleus,	of	comet,	160.
	
objective,	of	telescope,	78.
obliquity	of	ecliptic,	25.
observations,	of	stars,	10.
occultation	of	stars,	103.
orbits,	of	comets,	161.
of	double	stars,	199.
of	moon,	92.
of	planets,	28.
orion	nebula,	215.
	
parabola,	35,	38,	161.
parabolic	velocity,	38.
parallax,	114,	188.
penumbra,	64,	121.
perihelion,	38.
periodic	comets,	176.
personal	equation,	82.
perturbations,	39.
of	meteors,	174.
phases,	of	the	moon,	91,	92.
photography,	81.
of	stars,	13.
photosphere,	of	sun,	121.
planets,	26,	133.
distances	from	the	sun,	134.
how	to	find,	29.
mass,	density,	size,	133.
motion	of,	27,	38.
periodic	times	of,	30.
planetary	nebulæ,	215.
pleiades,	16,	215.
plumb-line	apparatus,	11,	18.
poles,	21.
precession,	46.
prisms,	84.
problem	of	three	bodies,	39.
prominences,	solar,	125.
proper	motions,	191.
protractor,	2.
ptolemaic	system,	32.
	
radiant	energy,	75.
radiant,	of	meteor	shower,	171.
radius	victor,	33.
reference	lines	and	circles,	17.
refraction,	50.
right	ascension,	16,	20,	21.
roche’s	limit,	239.
rotation,	of	earth,	55.
of	mars,	151.
of	moon,	99.
of	jupiter,	138.
of	saturn,	144.
of	sun,	120,	132.
	
saros,	72.
satellites,	of	jupiter,	136,	140.
of	mars,	155.
of	saturn,	145.
saturn,	142.
ball	of,	144.
orbit,	29.
rings,	142.
rotation,	144.
satellites,	145.
seasons,	on	the	earth,	47.
on	mars,	151.
shadow	cone,	64,	66.
sidereal	time,	20,	54.
shooting	stars,	158.	(see	meteor.)
spectroscope,	84.
spectroscopic	binaries,	203.
spectrum,	84,	87.
of	comets,	182.
of	nebulæ,	216.
of	stars,	211.
types	of,	88.
spectrum	analysis,	85.
spiral	nebulæ,	215.
standard	time,	57.
stars,	8,	184.
classes	of,	212.
clusters,	213.
colors,	209.
dark	stars,	201.
development	of,	242.
distances	from	the	sun,	188,	196.
distribution	of,	220.
double	stars,	198,	203.
drift,	194.
magnitudes,	9,	196.
number	of,	185.
spectra,	211.
temporary,	208.
variable,	204.
starlight,	absorption	of,	225.
star	maps,	construction	of,	23.
stellar	system,	extent	of,	223.
sun’s	apparent	motion,	25.
real	motion,	195.
sun,	110.
chemical	composition,	116.
chromosphere,	124.
corona,	123.
distance	from	the	earth,	111.
faculæ,	119,	122.
gaseous	constitution,	127.
heat	of,	117.
mechanism	of,	126.
physical	properties,	115-120.
prominences,	125.
rotation,	120,	132.
surface	of,	119.
temperature,	118.
sun	spots,	119,	121.
period,	129,	131.
zones,	130.
	
telescopes,	78.
equatorial	mounting	for,	80.
magnifying	power	of,	79.
temperature	of	jupiter,	139.
of	mars,	152.
of	mercury,	149.
of	moon,	107.
of	sun,	118.
temporary	stars,	208.
terminator,	91.
tenth	meter,	75.
tidal	friction,	233-238.
tides,	42.
time,	sidereal,	20,	54.
solar,	52.
determination	of,	20.
equation	of,	53.
standard,	57.
triangulation,	3.
trifid	nebula,	215.
twilight,	51.
twinkling,	of	stars,	48.
	
universe,	development	of,	226.
stability	of,	247.
uranus,	146.
	
variable	stars,	204.
velocity,	its	relation	to	orbital	motion,	38.
venus,	148.
orbit	of,	30.
vernal	equinox,	21,	25.
vertical	circle,	21.
	
wave	front,	76.
wave	lengths,	75,	86.
	
year,	25.
leap	year,	61.
sidereal	year,	59.
tropical	year,	60.
	
zenith,	21.
zodiac,	26.
zodiacal	light,	168.
the	end
protractor	to	accompany	comstock’s	astronomy
end	of	project	gutenberg’s	a	text-book	of	astronomy,	by	george	c.	comstock
***	end	of	this	project	gutenberg	ebook	a	text-book	of	astronomy	***
*****	this	file	should	be	named	34834-h.htm	or	34834-h.zip	*****
this	and	all	associated	files	of	various	formats	will	be	found	in:
								http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/8/3/34834/
produced	by	chris	curnow,	iris	schimandle,	lindy	walsh	and
the	online	distributed	proofreading	team	at
http://www.pgdp.net
updated	editions	will	replace	the	previous	one—the	old	editions
will	be	renamed.
creating	the	works	from	public	domain	print	editions	means	that	no
one	owns	a	united	states	copyright	in	these	works,	so	the	foundation
(and	you!)	can	copy	and	distribute	it	in	the	united	states	without
permission	and	without	paying	copyright	royalties.		special	rules,
set	forth	in	the	general	terms	of	use	part	of	this	license,	apply	to
copying	and	distributing	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	to
protect	the	project	gutenberg-tm	concept	and	trademark.		project
gutenberg	is	a	registered	trademark,	and	may	not	be	used	if	you
charge	for	the	ebooks,	unless	you	receive	specific	permission.		if	you
do	not	charge	anything	for	copies	of	this	ebook,	complying	with	the
rules	is	very	easy.		you	may	use	this	ebook	for	nearly	any	purpose
such	as	creation	of	derivative	works,	reports,	performances	and
research.		they	may	be	modified	and	printed	and	given	away—you	may	do
practically	anything	with	public	domain	ebooks.		redistribution	is
subject	to	the	trademark	license,	especially	commercial
redistribution.
***	start:	full	license	***
the	full	project	gutenberg	license
please	read	this	before	you	distribute	or	use	this	work
to	protect	the	project	gutenberg-tm	mission	of	promoting	the	free
distribution	of	electronic	works,	by	using	or	distributing	this	work
(or	any	other	work	associated	in	any	way	with	the	phrase	“project
gutenberg”),	you	agree	to	comply	with	all	the	terms	of	the	full	project
gutenberg-tm	license	(available	with	this	file	or	online	at
http://gutenberg.org/license).
section	1.		general	terms	of	use	and	redistributing	project	gutenberg-tm
electronic	works
1.a.		by	reading	or	using	any	part	of	this	project	gutenberg-tm
electronic	work,	you	indicate	that	you	have	read,	understand,	agree	to
and	accept	all	the	terms	of	this	license	and	intellectual	property
(trademark/copyright)	agreement.		if	you	do	not	agree	to	abide	by	all
the	terms	of	this	agreement,	you	must	cease	using	and	return	or	destroy
all	copies	of	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	in	your	possession.
if	you	paid	a	fee	for	obtaining	a	copy	of	or	access	to	a	project
gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	and	you	do	not	agree	to	be	bound	by	the
terms	of	this	agreement,	you	may	obtain	a	refund	from	the	person	or
entity	to	whom	you	paid	the	fee	as	set	forth	in	paragraph	1.e.8.
1.b.		“project	gutenberg”	is	a	registered	trademark.		it	may	only	be
used	on	or	associated	in	any	way	with	an	electronic	work	by	people	who
agree	to	be	bound	by	the	terms	of	this	agreement.		there	are	a	few
things	that	you	can	do	with	most	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	works
even	without	complying	with	the	full	terms	of	this	agreement.		see
paragraph	1.c	below.		there	are	a	lot	of	things	you	can	do	with	project
gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	if	you	follow	the	terms	of	this	agreement
and	help	preserve	free	future	access	to	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic
works.		see	paragraph	1.e	below.
1.c.		the	project	gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation	(“the	foundation”
or	pglaf),	owns	a	compilation	copyright	in	the	collection	of	project
gutenberg-tm	electronic	works.		nearly	all	the	individual	works	in	the
collection	are	in	the	public	domain	in	the	united	states.		if	an
individual	work	is	in	the	public	domain	in	the	united	states	and	you	are
located	in	the	united	states,	we	do	not	claim	a	right	to	prevent	you	from
copying,	distributing,	performing,	displaying	or	creating	derivative
works	based	on	the	work	as	long	as	all	references	to	project	gutenberg
are	removed.		of	course,	we	hope	that	you	will	support	the	project
gutenberg-tm	mission	of	promoting	free	access	to	electronic	works	by
freely	sharing	project	gutenberg-tm	works	in	compliance	with	the	terms	of
this	agreement	for	keeping	the	project	gutenberg-tm	name	associated	with
the	work.		you	can	easily	comply	with	the	terms	of	this	agreement	by
keeping	this	work	in	the	same	format	with	its	attached	full	project
gutenberg-tm	license	when	you	share	it	without	charge	with	others.
1.d.		the	copyright	laws	of	the	place	where	you	are	located	also	govern
what	you	can	do	with	this	work.		copyright	laws	in	most	countries	are	in
a	constant	state	of	change.		if	you	are	outside	the	united	states,	check
the	laws	of	your	country	in	addition	to	the	terms	of	this	agreement
before	downloading,	copying,	displaying,	performing,	distributing	or
creating	derivative	works	based	on	this	work	or	any	other	project
gutenberg-tm	work.		the	foundation	makes	no	representations	concerning
the	copyright	status	of	any	work	in	any	country	outside	the	united
states.
1.e.		unless	you	have	removed	all	references	to	project	gutenberg:
1.e.1.		the	following	sentence,	with	active	links	to,	or	other	immediate
access	to,	the	full	project	gutenberg-tm	license	must	appear	prominently
whenever	any	copy	of	a	project	gutenberg-tm	work	(any	work	on	which	the
phrase	“project	gutenberg”	appears,	or	with	which	the	phrase	“project
gutenberg”	is	associated)	is	accessed,	displayed,	performed,	viewed,
copied	or	distributed:
this	ebook	is	for	the	use	of	anyone	anywhere	at	no	cost	and	with
almost	no	restrictions	whatsoever.		you	may	copy	it,	give	it	away	or
re-use	it	under	the	terms	of	the	project	gutenberg	license	included
with	this	ebook	or	online	at	www.gutenberg.org
1.e.2.		if	an	individual	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	is	derived
from	the	public	domain	(does	not	contain	a	notice	indicating	that	it	is
posted	with	permission	of	the	copyright	holder),	the	work	can	be	copied
and	distributed	to	anyone	in	the	united	states	without	paying	any	fees
or	charges.		if	you	are	redistributing	or	providing	access	to	a	work
with	the	phrase	“project	gutenberg”	associated	with	or	appearing	on	the
work,	you	must	comply	either	with	the	requirements	of	paragraphs	1.e.1
through	1.e.7	or	obtain	permission	for	the	use	of	the	work	and	the
project	gutenberg-tm	trademark	as	set	forth	in	paragraphs	1.e.8	or
1.e.9.
1.e.3.		if	an	individual	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	is	posted
with	the	permission	of	the	copyright	holder,	your	use	and	distribution
must	comply	with	both	paragraphs	1.e.1	through	1.e.7	and	any	additional
terms	imposed	by	the	copyright	holder.		additional	terms	will	be	linked
to	the	project	gutenberg-tm	license	for	all	works	posted	with	the
permission	of	the	copyright	holder	found	at	the	beginning	of	this	work.
1.e.4.		do	not	unlink	or	detach	or	remove	the	full	project	gutenberg-tm
license	terms	from	this	work,	or	any	files	containing	a	part	of	this
work	or	any	other	work	associated	with	project	gutenberg-tm.
1.e.5.		do	not	copy,	display,	perform,	distribute	or	redistribute	this
electronic	work,	or	any	part	of	this	electronic	work,	without
prominently	displaying	the	sentence	set	forth	in	paragraph	1.e.1	with
active	links	or	immediate	access	to	the	full	terms	of	the	project
gutenberg-tm	license.
1.e.6.		you	may	convert	to	and	distribute	this	work	in	any	binary,
compressed,	marked	up,	nonproprietary	or	proprietary	form,	including	any
word	processing	or	hypertext	form.		however,	if	you	provide	access	to	or
distribute	copies	of	a	project	gutenberg-tm	work	in	a	format	other	than
“plain	vanilla	ascii”	or	other	format	used	in	the	official	version
posted	on	the	official	project	gutenberg-tm	web	site	(www.gutenberg.org),
you	must,	at	no	additional	cost,	fee	or	expense	to	the	user,	provide	a
copy,	a	means	of	exporting	a	copy,	or	a	means	of	obtaining	a	copy	upon
request,	of	the	work	in	its	original	“plain	vanilla	ascii”	or	other
form.		any	alternate	format	must	include	the	full	project	gutenberg-tm
license	as	specified	in	paragraph	1.e.1.
1.e.7.		do	not	charge	a	fee	for	access	to,	viewing,	displaying,
performing,	copying	or	distributing	any	project	gutenberg-tm	works
unless	you	comply	with	paragraph	1.e.8	or	1.e.9.
1.e.8.		you	may	charge	a	reasonable	fee	for	copies	of	or	providing
access	to	or	distributing	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	provided
that
-	you	pay	a	royalty	fee	of	20%	of	the	gross	profits	you	derive	from
					the	use	of	project	gutenberg-tm	works	calculated	using	the	method
					you	already	use	to	calculate	your	applicable	taxes.		the	fee	is
					owed	to	the	owner	of	the	project	gutenberg-tm	trademark,	but	he
					has	agreed	to	donate	royalties	under	this	paragraph	to	the
					project	gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation.		royalty	payments
					must	be	paid	within	60	days	following	each	date	on	which	you
					prepare	(or	are	legally	required	to	prepare)	your	periodic	tax
					returns.		royalty	payments	should	be	clearly	marked	as	such	and
					sent	to	the	project	gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation	at	the
					address	specified	in	section	4,	“information	about	donations	to
					the	project	gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation.”
-	you	provide	a	full	refund	of	any	money	paid	by	a	user	who	notifies
					you	in	writing	(or	by	e-mail)	within	30	days	of	receipt	that	s/he
					does	not	agree	to	the	terms	of	the	full	project	gutenberg-tm
					license.		you	must	require	such	a	user	to	return	or
					destroy	all	copies	of	the	works	possessed	in	a	physical	medium
					and	discontinue	all	use	of	and	all	access	to	other	copies	of
					project	gutenberg-tm	works.
-	you	provide,	in	accordance	with	paragraph	1.f.3,	a	full	refund	of	any
					money	paid	for	a	work	or	a	replacement	copy,	if	a	defect	in	the
					electronic	work	is	discovered	and	reported	to	you	within	90	days
					of	receipt	of	the	work.
-	you	comply	with	all	other	terms	of	this	agreement	for	free
					distribution	of	project	gutenberg-tm	works.
1.e.9.		if	you	wish	to	charge	a	fee	or	distribute	a	project	gutenberg-tm
electronic	work	or	group	of	works	on	different	terms	than	are	set
forth	in	this	agreement,	you	must	obtain	permission	in	writing	from
both	the	project	gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation	and	michael
hart,	the	owner	of	the	project	gutenberg-tm	trademark.		contact	the
foundation	as	set	forth	in	section	3	below.
1.f.
1.f.1.		project	gutenberg	volunteers	and	employees	expend	considerable
effort	to	identify,	do	copyright	research	on,	transcribe	and	proofread
public	domain	works	in	creating	the	project	gutenberg-tm
collection.		despite	these	efforts,	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic
works,	and	the	medium	on	which	they	may	be	stored,	may	contain
“defects,”	such	as,	but	not	limited	to,	incomplete,	inaccurate	or
corrupt	data,	transcription	errors,	a	copyright	or	other	intellectual
property	infringement,	a	defective	or	damaged	disk	or	other	medium,	a
computer	virus,	or	computer	codes	that	damage	or	cannot	be	read	by
your	equipment.
1.f.2.		limited	warranty,	disclaimer	of	damages	-	except	for	the	“right
of	replacement	or	refund”	described	in	paragraph	1.f.3,	the	project
gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation,	the	owner	of	the	project
gutenberg-tm	trademark,	and	any	other	party	distributing	a	project
gutenberg-tm	electronic	work	under	this	agreement,	disclaim	all
liability	to	you	for	damages,	costs	and	expenses,	including	legal
fees.		you	agree	that	you	have	no	remedies	for	negligence,	strict
liability,	breach	of	warranty	or	breach	of	contract	except	those
provided	in	paragraph	1.f.3.	you	agree	that	the	foundation,	the
trademark	owner,	and	any	distributor	under	this	agreement	will	not	be
liable	to	you	for	actual,	direct,	indirect,	consequential,	punitive	or
incidental	damages	even	if	you	give	notice	of	the	possibility	of	such
damage.
1.f.3.		limited	right	of	replacement	or	refund	-	if	you	discover	a
defect	in	this	electronic	work	within	90	days	of	receiving	it,	you	can
receive	a	refund	of	the	money	(if	any)	you	paid	for	it	by	sending	a
written	explanation	to	the	person	you	received	the	work	from.		if	you
received	the	work	on	a	physical	medium,	you	must	return	the	medium	with
your	written	explanation.		the	person	or	entity	that	provided	you	with
the	defective	work	may	elect	to	provide	a	replacement	copy	in	lieu	of	a
refund.		if	you	received	the	work	electronically,	the	person	or	entity
providing	it	to	you	may	choose	to	give	you	a	second	opportunity	to
receive	the	work	electronically	in	lieu	of	a	refund.		if	the	second	copy
is	also	defective,	you	may	demand	a	refund	in	writing	without	further
opportunities	to	fix	the	problem.
1.f.4.		except	for	the	limited	right	of	replacement	or	refund	set	forth
in	paragraph	1.f.3,	this	work	is	provided	to	you	‘as-is’	with	no	other
warranties	of	any	kind,	express	or	implied,	including	but	not	limited	to
warranties	of	merchantibility	or	fitness	for	any	purpose.
1.f.5.		some	states	do	not	allow	disclaimers	of	certain	implied
warranties	or	the	exclusion	or	limitation	of	certain	types	of	damages.
if	any	disclaimer	or	limitation	set	forth	in	this	agreement	violates	the
law	of	the	state	applicable	to	this	agreement,	the	agreement	shall	be
interpreted	to	make	the	maximum	disclaimer	or	limitation	permitted	by
the	applicable	state	law.		the	invalidity	or	unenforceability	of	any
provision	of	this	agreement	shall	not	void	the	remaining	provisions.
1.f.6.		indemnity	-	you	agree	to	indemnify	and	hold	the	foundation,	the
trademark	owner,	any	agent	or	employee	of	the	foundation,	anyone
providing	copies	of	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	works	in	accordance
with	this	agreement,	and	any	volunteers	associated	with	the	production,
promotion	and	distribution	of	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic	works,
harmless	from	all	liability,	costs	and	expenses,	including	legal	fees,
that	arise	directly	or	indirectly	from	any	of	the	following	which	you	do
or	cause	to	occur:	(a)	distribution	of	this	or	any	project	gutenberg-tm
work,	(b)	alteration,	modification,	or	additions	or	deletions	to	any
project	gutenberg-tm	work,	and	(c)	any	defect	you	cause.
section		2.		information	about	the	mission	of	project	gutenberg-tm
project	gutenberg-tm	is	synonymous	with	the	free	distribution	of
electronic	works	in	formats	readable	by	the	widest	variety	of	computers
including	obsolete,	old,	middle-aged	and	new	computers.		it	exists
because	of	the	efforts	of	hundreds	of	volunteers	and	donations	from
people	in	all	walks	of	life.
volunteers	and	financial	support	to	provide	volunteers	with	the
assistance	they	need,	are	critical	to	reaching	project	gutenberg-tm’s
goals	and	ensuring	that	the	project	gutenberg-tm	collection	will
remain	freely	available	for	generations	to	come.		in	2001,	the	project
gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation	was	created	to	provide	a	secure
and	permanent	future	for	project	gutenberg-tm	and	future	generations.
to	learn	more	about	the	project	gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation
and	how	your	efforts	and	donations	can	help,	see	sections	3	and	4
and	the	foundation	web	page	at	http://www.pglaf.org.
section	3.		information	about	the	project	gutenberg	literary	archive
foundation
the	project	gutenberg	literary	archive	foundation	is	a	non	profit
501(c)(3)	educational	corporation	organized	under	the	laws	of	the
state	of	mississippi	and	granted	tax	exempt	status	by	the	internal
revenue	service.		the	foundation’s	ein	or	federal	tax	identification
number	is	64-6221541.		its	501(c)(3)	letter	is	posted	at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.		contributions	to	the	project	gutenberg
literary	archive	foundation	are	tax	deductible	to	the	full	extent
permitted	by	u.s.	federal	laws	and	your	state’s	laws.
the	foundation’s	principal	office	is	located	at	4557	melan	dr.	s.
fairbanks,	ak,	99712.,	but	its	volunteers	and	employees	are	scattered
throughout	numerous	locations.		its	business	office	is	located	at
809	north	1500	west,	salt	lake	city,	ut	84116,	(801)	596-1887,	email
business@pglaf.org.		email	contact	links	and	up	to	date	contact
information	can	be	found	at	the	foundation’s	web	site	and	official
page	at	http://pglaf.org
for	additional	contact	information:
					dr.	gregory	b.	newby
					chief	executive	and	director
					gbnewby@pglaf.org
section	4.		information	about	donations	to	the	project	gutenberg
literary	archive	foundation
project	gutenberg-tm	depends	upon	and	cannot	survive	without	wide
spread	public	support	and	donations	to	carry	out	its	mission	of
increasing	the	number	of	public	domain	and	licensed	works	that	can	be
freely	distributed	in	machine	readable	form	accessible	by	the	widest
array	of	equipment	including	outdated	equipment.		many	small	donations
($1	to	$5,000)	are	particularly	important	to	maintaining	tax	exempt
status	with	the	irs.
the	foundation	is	committed	to	complying	with	the	laws	regulating
charities	and	charitable	donations	in	all	50	states	of	the	united
states.		compliance	requirements	are	not	uniform	and	it	takes	a
considerable	effort,	much	paperwork	and	many	fees	to	meet	and	keep	up
with	these	requirements.		we	do	not	solicit	donations	in	locations
where	we	have	not	received	written	confirmation	of	compliance.		to
send	donations	or	determine	the	status	of	compliance	for	any
particular	state	visit	http://pglaf.org
while	we	cannot	and	do	not	solicit	contributions	from	states	where	we
have	not	met	the	solicitation	requirements,	we	know	of	no	prohibition
against	accepting	unsolicited	donations	from	donors	in	such	states	who
approach	us	with	offers	to	donate.
international	donations	are	gratefully	accepted,	but	we	cannot	make
any	statements	concerning	tax	treatment	of	donations	received	from
outside	the	united	states.		u.s.	laws	alone	swamp	our	small	staff.
please	check	the	project	gutenberg	web	pages	for	current	donation
methods	and	addresses.		donations	are	accepted	in	a	number	of	other
ways	including	checks,	online	payments	and	credit	card	donations.
to	donate,	please	visit:	http://pglaf.org/donate
section	5.		general	information	about	project	gutenberg-tm	electronic
works.
professor	michael	s.	hart	is	the	originator	of	the	project	gutenberg-tm
concept	of	a	library	of	electronic	works	that	could	be	freely	shared
with	anyone.		for	thirty	years,	he	produced	and	distributed	project
gutenberg-tm	ebooks	with	only	a	loose	network	of	volunteer	support.
project	gutenberg-tm	ebooks	are	often	created	from	several	printed
editions,	all	of	which	are	confirmed	as	public	domain	in	the	u.s.
unless	a	copyright	notice	is	included.		thus,	we	do	not	necessarily
keep	ebooks	in	compliance	with	any	particular	paper	edition.
most	people	start	at	our	web	site	which	has	the	main	pg	search	facility:
					http://www.gutenberg.org
this	web	site	includes	information	about	project	gutenberg-tm,
including	how	to	make	donations	to	the	project	gutenberg	literary
archive	foundation,	how	to	help	produce	our	new	ebooks,	and	how	to
subscribe	to	our	email	newsletter	to	hear	about	new	ebooks.